The Project Gutenberg Etext of Mutual Aid, by P. Kropotkin

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before distributing this or any other
Project Gutenberg file.

We encourage you to keep this file, exactly as it is, on your
own disk, thereby keeping an electronic path open for future
readers.  Please do not remove this.

This header should be the first thing seen when anyone starts to
view the etext. Do not change or edit it without written permission.
The words are carefully chosen to provide users with the
information they need to understand what they may and may not
do with the etext.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These Etexts Are Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get etexts, and
further information, is included below.  We need your donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541



Title: Mutual Aid

Author: P. Kropotkin

Release Date: August, 2003 [Etext# 4341]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on January 11, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

The Project Gutenberg Etext of Mutual Aid, by P. Kropotkin
***This file should be named mtlad10.txt or mtlad10.zip***

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, mtlad11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, mtlad10a.txt

Edited by Charles Aldarondo Aldarondo@yahoo.com


Project Gutenberg Etexts are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep etexts in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our etexts one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
etexts, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2001 as we release over 50 new Etext
files per month, or 500 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 4000+
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 4,000 Etexts.  We need
funding, as well as continued efforts by volunteers, to maintain
or increase our production and reach our goals.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of November, 2001, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware,
Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin,
and Wyoming.

*In Progress

We have filed in about 45 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

All donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fundraising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fundraising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.10/04/01*END*






Edited by Charles Aldarondo Aldarondo@yahoo.com




MUTUAL AID

A FACTOR OF EVOLUTION

BY P. KROPOTKIN

1902






INTRODUCTION





Two aspects of animal life impressed me most during the
journeys which I made in my youth in Eastern Siberia and Northern
Manchuria. One of them was the extreme severity of the struggle
for existence which most species of animals have to carry on
against an inclement Nature; the enormous destruction of life
which periodically results from natural agencies; and the
consequent paucity of life over the vast territory which fell
under my observation. And the other was, that even in those few
spots where animal life teemed in abundance, I failed to find--
although I was eagerly looking for it--that bitter struggle for
the means of existence, among animals belonging to the same
species, which was considered by most Darwinists (though not
always by Darwin himself) as the dominant characteristic of
struggle for life, and the main factor of evolution.

The terrible snow-storms which sweep over the northern
portion of Eurasia in the later part of the winter, and the
glazed frost that often follows them; the frosts and the
snow-storms which return every year in the second half of May,
when the trees are already in full blossom and insect life swarms
everywhere; the early frosts and, occasionally, the heavy
snowfalls in July and August, which suddenly destroy myriads of
insects, as well as the second broods of the birds in the
prairies; the torrential rains, due to the monsoons, which fall
in more temperate regions in August and September--resulting in
inundations on a scale which is only known in America and in
Eastern Asia, and swamping, on the plateaus, areas as wide as
European States; and finally, the heavy snowfalls, early in
October, which eventually render a territory as large as France
and Germany, absolutely impracticable for ruminants, and destroy
them by the thousand--these were the conditions under which I
saw animal life struggling in Northern Asia. They made me realize
at an early date the overwhelming importance in Nature of what
Darwin described as "the natural checks to over-multiplication,"
in comparison to the struggle between individuals of the same
species for the means of subsistence, which may go on here and
there, to some limited extent, but never attains the importance
of the former. Paucity of life, under-population--not
over-population--being the distinctive feature of that immense
part of the globe which we name Northern Asia, I conceived since
then serious doubts--which subsequent study has only confirmed--
as to the reality of that fearful competition for food and
life within each species, which was an article of faith with most
Darwinists, and, consequently, as to the dominant part which this
sort of competition was supposed to play in the evolution of new
species.

On the other hand, wherever I saw animal life in abundance,
as, for instance, on the lakes where scores of species and
millions of individuals came together to rear their progeny; in
the colonies of rodents; in the migrations of birds which took
place at that time on a truly American scale along the Usuri; and
especially in a migration of fallow-deer which I witnessed on the
Amur, and during which scores of thousands of these intelligent
animals came together from an immense territory, flying before
the coming deep snow, in order to cross the Amur where it is
narrowest--in all these scenes of animal life which passed
before my eyes, I saw Mutual Aid and Mutual Support carried on to
an extent which made me suspect in it a feature of the greatest
importance for the maintenance of life, the preservation of each
species, and its further evolution.

And finally, I saw among the semi-wild cattle and horses in
Transbaikalia, among the wild ruminants everywhere, the
squirrels, and so on, that when animals have to struggle against
scarcity of food, in consequence of one of the above-mentioned
causes, the whole of that portion of the species which is
affected by the calamity, comes out of the ordeal so much
impoverished in vigour and health, that no progressive evolution
of the species can be based upon such periods of keen
competition.

Consequently, when my attention was drawn, later on, to the
relations between Darwinism and Sociology, I could agree with
none of the works and pamphlets that had been written upon this
important subject. They all endeavoured to prove that Man, owing
to his higher intelligence and knowledge, may mitigate the
harshness of the struggle for life between men; but they all
recognized at the same time that the struggle for the means of
existence, of every animal against all its congeners, and of
every man against all other men, was "a law of Nature." This
view, however, I could not accept, because I was persuaded that
to admit a pitiless inner war for life within each species, and
to see in that war a condition of progress, was to admit
something which not only had not yet been proved, but also lacked
confirmation from direct observation.

On the contrary, a lecture "On the Law of Mutual Aid," which
was delivered at a Russian Congress of Naturalists, in January
1880, by the well-known zoologist, Professor Kessler, the then
Dean of the St. Petersburg University, struck me as throwing a
new light on the whole subject. Kessler's idea was, that besides
the law of Mutual Struggle there is in Nature the law of Mutual
Aid, which, for the success of the struggle for life, and
especially for the progressive evolution of the species, is far
more important than the law of mutual contest. This suggestion--
which was, in reality, nothing but a further development of the
ideas expressed by Darwin himself in The Descent of Man--seemed
to me so correct and of so great an importance, that since I
became acquainted with it (in 1883) I began to collect materials
for further developing the idea, which Kessler had only cursorily
sketched in his lecture, but had not lived to develop. He died in
1881.

In one point only I could not entirely endorse Kessler's
views. Kessler alluded to "parental feeling" and care for progeny
(see below, Chapter I) as to the source of mutual inclinations in
animals. However, to determine how far these two feelings have
really been at work in the evolution of sociable instincts, and
how far other instincts have been at work in the same direction,
seems to me a quite distinct and a very wide question, which we
hardly can discuss yet. It will be only after we have well
established the facts of mutual aid in different classes of
animals, and their importance for evolution, that we shall be
able to study what belongs in the evolution of sociable feelings,
to parental feelings, and what to sociability proper--the
latter having evidently its origin at the earliest stages of the
evolution of the animal world, perhaps even at the
"colony-stages." I consequently directed my chief attention to
establishing first of all, the importance of the Mutual Aid
factor of evolution, leaving to ulterior research the task of
discovering the origin of the Mutual Aid instinct in Nature.

The importance of the Mutual Aid factor--"if its generality
could only be demonstrated"--did not escape the naturalist's
genius so manifest in Goethe. When Eckermann told once to Goethe--
it was in 1827--that two little wren-fledglings, which had
run away from him, were found by him next day in the nest of
robin redbreasts (Rothkehlchen), which fed the little ones,
together with their own youngsters, Goethe grew quite excited
about this fact. He saw in it a confirmation of his pantheistic
views, and said:--"If it be true that this feeding of a
stranger goes through all Nature as something having the
character of a general law--then many an enigma would be
solved. "He returned to this matter on the next day, and most
earnestly entreated Eckermann (who was, as is known, a zoologist)
to make a special study of the subject, adding that he would
surely come "to quite invaluable treasuries of results"
(Gesprache, edition of 1848, vol. iii. pp. 219, 221).
Unfortunately, this study was never made, although it is very
possible that Brehm, who has accumulated in his works such rich
materials relative to mutual aid among animals, might have been
inspired by Goethe's remark.

Several works of importance were published in the years
1872-1886, dealing with the intelligence and the mental life of
animals (they are mentioned in a footnote in Chapter I of this
book), and three of them dealt more especially with the subject
under consideration; namely, Les Societes animales, by Espinas
(Paris, 1877); La Lutte pour l'existence et l'association pout la
lutte, a lecture by J.L. Lanessan (April 1881); and Louis
Buchner's book, Liebe und Liebes-Leben in der Thierwelt, of which
the first edition appeared in 1882 or 1883, and a second, much
enlarged, in 1885. But excellent though each of these works is,
they leave ample room for a work in which Mutual Aid would be
considered, not only as an argument in favour of a pre-human
origin of moral instincts, but also as a law of Nature and a
factor of evolution. Espinas devoted his main attention to such
animal societies (ants, bees) as are established upon a
physiological division of labour, and though his work is full of
admirable hints in all possible directions, it was written at a
time when the evolution of human societies could not yet be
treated with the knowledge we now possess. Lanessan's lecture has
more the character of a brilliantly laid-out general plan of a
work, in which mutual support would be dealt with, beginning with
rocks in the sea, and then passing in review the world of plants,
of animals and men. As to Buchner's work, suggestive though it is
and rich in facts, I could not agree with its leading idea. The
book begins with a hymn to Love, and nearly all its illustrations
are intended to prove the existence of love and sympathy among
animals. However, to reduce animal sociability to love and
sympathy means to reduce its generality and its importance, just
as human ethics based upon love and personal sympathy only have
contributed to narrow the comprehension of the moral feeling as a
whole. It is not love to my neighbour--whom I often do not know
at all--which induces me to seize a pail of water and to rush
towards his house when I see it on fire; it is a far wider, even
though more vague feeling or instinct of human solidarity and
sociability which moves me. So it is also with animals. It is not
love, and not even sympathy (understood in its proper sense)
which induces a herd of ruminants or of horses to form a ring in
order to resist an attack of wolves; not love which induces
wolves to form a pack for hunting; not love which induces kittens
or lambs to play, or a dozen of species of young birds to spend
their days together in the autumn; and it is neither love nor
personal sympathy which induces many thousand fallow-deer
scattered over a territory as large as France to form into a
score of separate herds, all marching towards a given spot, in
order to cross there a river. It is a feeling infinitely wider
than love or personal sympathy--an instinct that has been
slowly developed among animals and men in the course of an
extremely long evolution, and which has taught animals and men
alike the force they can borrow from the practice of mutual aid
and support, and the joys they can find in social life.

The importance of this distinction will be easily appreciated
by the student of animal psychology, and the more so by the
student of human ethics. Love, sympathy and self-sacrifice
certainly play an immense part in the progressive development of
our moral feelings. But it is not love and not even sympathy upon
which Society is based in mankind. It is the conscience--be it
only at the stage of an instinct--of human solidarity. It is
the unconscious recognition of the force that is borrowed by each
man from the practice of mutual aid; of the close dependency of
every one's happiness upon the happiness of all; and of the sense
of justice, or equity, which brings the individual to consider
the rights of every other individual as equal to his own. Upon
this broad and necessary foundation the still higher moral
feelings are developed. But this subject lies outside the scope
of the present work, and I shall only indicate here a lecture,
"Justice and Morality" which I delivered in reply to Huxley's
Ethics, and in which the subject has been treated at some length.

Consequently I thought that a book, written on Mutual Aid as
a Law of Nature and a factor of evolution, might fill an
important gap. When Huxley issued, in 1888, his
"Struggle-for-life" manifesto (Struggle for Existence and its
Bearing upon Man), which to my appreciation was a very incorrect
representation of the facts of Nature, as one sees them in the
bush and in the forest, I communicated with the editor of the
Nineteenth Century, asking him whether he would give the
hospitality of his review to an elaborate reply to the views of
one of the most prominent Darwinists; and Mr. James Knowles
received the proposal with fullest sympathy. I also spoke of it
to W. Bates. "Yes, certainly; that is true Darwinism," was his
reply. "It is horrible what 'they' have made of Darwin. Write
these articles, and when they are printed, I will write to you a
letter which you may publish. "Unfortunately, it took me nearly
seven years to write these articles, and when the last was
published, Bates was no longer living.

After having discussed the importance of mutual aid in
various classes of animals, I was evidently bound to discuss the
importance of the same factor in the evolution of Man. This was
the more necessary as there are a number of evolutionists who may
not refuse to admit the importance of mutual aid among animals,
but who, like Herbert Spencer, will refuse to admit it for Man.
For primitive Man--they maintain--war of each against all was
the law of life. In how far this assertion, which has been too
willingly repeated, without sufficient criticism, since the times
of Hobbes, is supported by what we know about the early phases of
human development, is discussed in the chapters given to the
Savages and the Barbarians.

The number and importance of mutual-aid institutions which
were developed by the creative genius of the savage and
half-savage masses, during the earliest clan-period of mankind
and still more during the next village-community period, and the
immense influence which these early institutions have exercised
upon the subsequent development of mankind, down to the present
times, induced me to extend my researches to the later,
historical periods as well; especially, to study that most
interesting period--the free medieval city republics, of which
the universality and influence upon our modern civilization have
not yet been duly appreciated. And finally, I have tried to
indicate in brief the immense importance which the mutual-support
instincts, inherited by mankind from its extremely long
evolution, play even now in our modern society, which is supposed
to rest upon the principle: "every one for himself, and the State
for all," but which it never has succeeded, nor will succeed in
realizing.

It may be objected to this book that both animals and men are
represented in it under too favourable an aspect; that their
sociable qualities are insisted upon, while their anti-social and
self-asserting instincts are hardly touched upon. This was,
however, unavoidable. We have heard so much lately of the "harsh,
pitiless struggle for life," which was said to be carried on by
every animal against all other animals, every "savage" against
all other "savages," and every civilized man against all his
co-citizens--and these assertions have so much become an
article of faith--that it was necessary, first of all, to
oppose to them a wide series of facts showing animal and human
life under a quite different aspect. It was necessary to indicate
the overwhelming importance which sociable habits play in Nature
and in the progressive evolution of both the animal species and
human beings: to prove that they secure to animals a better
protection from their enemies, very often facilities for getting
food and (winter provisions, migrations, etc.), longevity,
therefore a greater facility for the development of intellectual
faculties; and that they have given to men, in addition to the
same advantages, the possibility of working out those
institutions which have enabled mankind to survive in its hard
struggle against Nature, and to progress, notwithstanding all the
vicissitudes of its history. It is a book on the law of Mutual
Aid, viewed at as one of the chief factors of evolution--not on
all factors of evolution and their respective values; and this
first book had to be written, before the latter could become
possible.

I should certainly be the last to underrate the part which
the self-assertion of the individual has played in the evolution
of mankind. However, this subject requires, I believe, a much
deeper treatment than the one it has hitherto received. In the
history of mankind, individual self-assertion has often been, and
continually is, something quite different from, and far larger
and deeper than, the petty, unintelligent narrow-mindedness,
which, with a large class of writers, goes for "individualism"
and "self-assertion." N or have history-making individuals been
limited to those whom historians have represented as heroes. My
intention, consequently, is, if circumstances permit it, to
discuss separately the part taken by the self-assertion of the
individual in the progressive evolution of mankind. I can only
make in this place the following general remark:--When the
Mutual Aid institutions--the tribe, the village community, the
guilds, the medieval city--began, in the course of history, to
lose their primitive character, to be invaded by parasitic
growths, and thus to become hindrances to progress, the revolt of
individuals against these institutions took always two different
aspects. Part of those who rose up strove to purify the old
institutions, or to work out a higher form of commonwealth, based
upon the same Mutual Aid principles; they tried, for instance, to
introduce the principle of "compensation," instead of the lex
talionis, and later on, the pardon of offences, or a still higher
ideal of equality before the human conscience, in lieu of
"compensation," according to class-value. But at the very same
time, another portion of the same individual rebels endeavoured
to break down the protective institutions of mutual support, with
no other intention but to increase their own wealth and their own
powers. In this three-cornered contest, between the two classes
of revolted individuals and the supporters of what existed, lies
the real tragedy of history. But to delineate that contest, and
honestly to study the part played in the evolution of mankind by
each one of these three forces, would require at least as many
years as it took me to write this book.

Of works dealing with nearly the same subject, which have
been published since the publication of my articles on Mutual Aid
among Animals, I must mention The Lowell Lectures on the Ascent
of Man, by Henry Drummond (London, 1894), and The Origin and
Growth of the Moral Instinct, by A. Sutherland (London, 1898).
Both are constructed chiefly on the lines taken in Buchner's
Love, and in the second work the parental and familial feeling as
the sole influence at work in the development of the moral
feelings has been dealt with at some length. A third work dealing
with man and written on similar lines is The Principles of
Sociology, by Prof. F.A. Giddings, the first edition of which was
published in 1896 at New York and London, and the leading ideas
of which were sketched by the author in a pamphlet in 1894. I
must leave, however, to literary critics the task of discussing
the points of contact, resemblance, or divergence between these
works and mine.

The different chapters of this book were published first in
the Nineteenth Century ("Mutual Aid among Animals," in September
and November 1890; "Mutual Aid among Savages," in April 1891;
"Mutual Aid among the Barbarians," in January 1892; "Mutual Aid
in the Medieval City," in August and September 1894; and "Mutual
Aid amongst Modern Men," in January and June 1896). In bringing
them out in a book form my first intention was to embody in an
Appendix the mass of materials, as well as the discussion of
several secondary points, which had to be omitted in the review
articles. It appeared, however, that the Appendix would double
the size of the book, and I was compelled to abandon, or, at
least, to postpone its publication. The present Appendix includes
the discussion of only a few points which have been the matter of
scientific controversy during the last few years; and into the
text I have introduced only such matter as could be introduced
without altering the structure of the work.

I am glad of this opportunity for expressing to the editor of
the Nineteenth Century, Mr. James Knowles, my very best thanks,
both for the kind hospitality which he offered to these papers in
his review, as soon as he knew their general idea, and the
permission he kindly gave me to reprint them.

Bromley, Kent, 1902.






CHAPTER I

MUTUAL AID AMONG ANIMALS

Struggle for existence. Mutual Aid a law of Nature and chief factor
of progressive evolution. Invertebrates. Ants and Bees. Birds,
hunting and fishing associations. Sociability. Mutual protection
among small birds. Cranes, parrots.





The conception of struggle for existence as a factor of
evolution, introduced into science by Darwin and Wallace, has
permitted us to embrace an immensely wide range of phenomena in
one single generalization, which soon became the very basis of
our philosophical, biological, and sociological speculations. An
immense variety of facts:--adaptations of function and
structure of organic beings to their surroundings; physiological
and anatomical evolution; intellectual progress, and moral
development itself, which we formerly used to explain by so many
different causes, were embodied by Darwin in one general
conception. We understood them as continued endeavours--as a
struggle against adverse circumstances--for such a development
of individuals, races, species and societies, as would result in
the greatest possible fulness, variety, and intensity of life. It
may be that at the outset Darwin himself was not fully aware of
the generality of the factor which he first invoked for
explaining one series only of facts relative to the accumulation
of individual variations in incipient species. But he foresaw
that the term which he was introducing into science would lose
its philosophical and its only true meaning if it were to be used
in its narrow sense only--that of a struggle between separate
individuals for the sheer means of existence. And at the very
beginning of his memorable work he insisted upon the term being
taken in its "large and metaphorical sense including dependence
of one being on another, and including (which is more important)
not only the life of the individual, but success in leaving
progeny."(1)

While he himself was chiefly using the term in its narrow
sense for his own special purpose, he warned his followers
against committing the error (which he seems once to have
committed himself) of overrating its narrow meaning. In The
Descent of Man he gave some powerful pages to illustrate its
proper, wide sense. He pointed out how, in numberless animal
societies, the struggle between separate individuals for the
means of existence disappears, how struggle is replaced by
co-operation, and how that substitution results in the
development of intellectual and moral faculties which secure to
the species the best conditions for survival. He intimated that
in such cases the fittest are not the physically strongest, nor
the cunningest, but those who learn to combine so as mutually to
support each other, strong and weak alike, for the welfare of the
community. "Those communities," he wrote, "which included the
greatest number of the most sympathetic members would flourish
best, and rear the greatest number of offspring" (2nd edit., p.
163). The term, which originated from the narrow Malthusian
conception of competition between each and all, thus lost its
narrowness in the mind of one who knew Nature.

Unhappily, these remarks, which might have become the basis
of most fruitful researches, were overshadowed by the masses of
facts gathered for the purpose of illustrating the consequences
of a real competition for life. Besides, Darwin never attempted
to submit to a closer investigation the relative importance of
the two aspects under which the struggle for existence appears in
the animal world, and he never wrote the work he proposed to
write upon the natural checks to over-multiplication, although
that work would have been the crucial test for appreciating the
real purport of individual struggle. Nay, on the very pages just
mentioned, amidst data disproving the narrow Malthusian
conception of struggle, the old Malthusian leaven reappeared--
namely, in Darwin's remarks as to the alleged inconveniences of
maintaining the "weak in mind and body" in our civilized
societies (ch. v). As if thousands of weak-bodied and infirm
poets, scientists, inventors, and reformers, together with other
thousands of so-called "fools" and "weak-minded enthusiasts,"
were not the most precious weapons used by humanity in its
struggle for existence by intellectual and moral arms, which
Darwin himself emphasized in those same chapters of Descent of
Man.

It happened with Darwin's theory as it always happens with
theories having any bearing upon human relations. Instead of
widening it according to his own hints, his followers narrowed it
still more. And while Herbert Spencer, starting on independent
but closely allied lines, attempted to widen the inquiry into
that great question, "Who are the fittest?" especially in the
appendix to the third edition of the Data of Ethics, the
numberless followers of Darwin reduced the notion of struggle for
existence to its narrowest limits. They came to conceive the
animal world as a world of perpetual struggle among half-starved
individuals, thirsting for one another's blood. They made modern
literature resound with the war-cry of woe to the vanquished, as
if it were the last word of modern biology. They raised the
"pitiless" struggle for personal advantages to the height of a
biological principle which man must submit to as well, under the
menace of otherwise succumbing in a world based upon mutual
extermination. Leaving aside the economists who know of natural
science but a few words borrowed from second-hand vulgarizers, we
must recognize that even the most authorized exponents of
Darwin's views did their best to maintain those false ideas. In
fact, if we take Huxley, who certainly is considered as one of
the ablest exponents of the theory of evolution, were we not
taught by him, in a paper on the 'Struggle for Existence and its
Bearing upon Man,' that,

"from the point of view of the moralist, the animal world is on
about the same level as a gladiators' show. The creatures are
fairly well treated, and set to, fight hereby the strongest, the
swiftest, and the cunningest live to fight another day. The
spectator has no need to turn his thumb down, as no quarter is
given."

Or, further down in the same article, did he not tell us
that, as among animals, so among primitive men,

"the weakest and stupidest went to the wall, while the toughest
and shrewdest, those who were best fitted to cope with their
circumstances, but not the best in another way, survived. Life
was a continuous free fight, and beyond the limited and temporary
relations of the family, the Hobbesian war of each against all
was the normal state of existence."(2)

In how far this view of nature is supported by fact, will be
seen from the evidence which will be here submitted to the reader
as regards the animal world, and as regards primitive man. But it
may be remarked at once that Huxley's view of nature had as
little claim to be taken as a scientific deduction as the
opposite view of Rousseau, who saw in nature but love, peace, and
harmony destroyed by the accession of man. In fact, the first
walk in the forest, the first observation upon any animal
society, or even the perusal of any serious work dealing with
animal life (D'Orbigny's, Audubon's, Le Vaillant's, no matter
which), cannot but set the naturalist thinking about the part
taken by social life in the life of animals, and prevent him from
seeing in Nature nothing but a field of slaughter, just as this
would prevent him from seeing in Nature nothing but harmony and
peace. Rousseau had committed the error of excluding the
beak-and-claw fight from his thoughts; and Huxley committed the
opposite error; but neither Rousseau's optimism nor Huxley's
pessimism can be accepted as an impartial interpretation of
nature.

As soon as we study animals--not in laboratories and
museums only, but in the forest and the prairie, in the steppe
and the mountains--we at once perceive that though there is an
immense amount of warfare and extermination going on amidst
various species, and especially amidst various classes of
animals, there is, at the same time, as much, or perhaps even
more, of mutual support, mutual aid, and mutual defence amidst
animals belonging to the same species or, at least, to the same
society. Sociability is as much a law of nature as mutual
struggle. Of course it would be extremely difficult to estimate,
however roughly, the relative numerical importance of both these
series of facts. But if we resort to an indirect test, and ask
Nature: "Who are the fittest: those who are continually at war
with each other, or those who support one another?" we at once
see that those animals which acquire habits of mutual aid are
undoubtedly the fittest. They have more chances to survive, and
they attain, in their respective classes, the highest development
of intelligence and bodily organization. If the numberless facts
which can be brought forward to support this view are taken into
account, we may safely say that mutual aid is as much a law of
animal life as mutual struggle, but that, as a factor of
evolution, it most probably has a far greater importance,
inasmuch as it favours the development of such habits and
characters as insure the maintenance and further development of
the species, together with the greatest amount of welfare and
enjoyment of life for the individual, with the least waste of
energy.

Of the scientific followers of Darwin, the first, as far as I
know, who understood the full purport of Mutual Aid as a law of
Nature and the chief factor of evolution, was a well-known
Russian zoologist, the late Dean of the St. Petersburg
University, Professor Kessler. He developed his ideas in an
address which he delivered in January 1880, a few months before
his death, at a Congress of Russian naturalists; but, like so
many good things published in the Russian tongue only, that
remarkable address remains almost entirely unknown.(3)

"As a zoologist of old standing," he felt bound to protest
against the abuse of a term--the struggle for existence--
borrowed from zoology, or, at least, against overrating its
importance. Zoology, he said, and those sciences which deal with
man, continually insist upon what they call the pitiless law of
struggle for existence. But they forget the existence of another
law which may be described as the law of mutual aid, which law,
at least for the animals, is far more essential than the former.
He pointed out how the need of leaving progeny necessarily brings
animals together, and, "the more the individuals keep together,
the more they mutually support each other, and the more are the
chances of the species for surviving, as well as for making
further progress in its intellectual development." "All classes
of animals," he continued, "and especially the higher ones,
practise mutual aid," and he illustrated his idea by examples
borrowed from the life of the burying beetles and the social life
of birds and some mammalia. The examples were few, as might have
been expected in a short opening address, but the chief points
were clearly stated; and, after mentioning that in the evolution
of mankind mutual aid played a still more prominent part,
Professor Kessler concluded as follows:--

"I obviously do not deny the struggle for existence, but I
maintain that the progressive development of the animal kingdom,
and especially of mankind, is favoured much more by mutual
support than by mutual struggle.... All organic beings have two
essential needs: that of nutrition, and that of propagating the
species. The former brings them to a struggle and to mutual
extermination, while the needs of maintaining the species bring
them to approach one another and to support one another. But I am
inclined to think that in the evolution of the organic world--
in the progressive modification of organic beings--mutual
support among individuals plays a much more important part than
their mutual struggle."(4)

The correctness of the above views struck most of the Russian
zoologists present, and Syevertsoff, whose work is well known to
ornithologists and geographers, supported them and illustrated
them by a few more examples. He mentioned sone of the species of
falcons which have "an almost ideal organization for robbery,"
and nevertheless are in decay, while other species of falcons,
which practise mutual help, do thrive. "Take, on the other side,
a sociable bird, the duck," he said; "it is poorly organized on
the whole, but it practises mutual support, and it almost invades
the earth, as may be judged from its numberless varieties and
species."

The readiness of the Russian zoologists to accept Kessler's
views seems quite natural, because nearly all of them have had
opportunities of studying the animal world in the wide
uninhabited regions of Northern Asia and East Russia; and it is
impossible to study like regions without being brought to the
same ideas. I recollect myself the impression produced upon me by
the animal world of Siberia when I explored the Vitim regions in
the company of so accomplished a zoologist as my friend Polyakoff
was. We both were under the fresh impression of the Origin of
Species, but we vainly looked for the keen competition between
animals of the same species which the reading of Darwin's work
had prepared us to expect, even after taking into account the
remarks of the third chapter (p. 54). We saw plenty of
adaptations for struggling, very often in common, against the
adverse circumstances of climate, or against various enemies, and
Polyakoff wrote many a good page upon the mutual dependency of
carnivores, ruminants, and rodents in their geographical
distribution; we witnessed numbers of facts of mutual support,
especially during the migrations of birds and ruminants; but even
in the Amur and Usuri regions, where animal life swarms in
abundance, facts of real competition and struggle between higher
animals of the same species came very seldom under my notice,
though I eagerly searched for them. The same impression appears
in the works of most Russian zoologists, and it probably explains
why Kessler's ideas were so welcomed by the Russian Darwinists,
whilst like ideas are not in vogue amidst the followers of Darwin
in Western Europe.

The first thing which strikes us as soon as we begin studying
the struggle for existence under both its aspects--direct and
metaphorical--is the abundance of facts of mutual aid, not only
for rearing progeny, as recognized by most evolutionists, but
also for the safety of the individual, and for providing it with
the necessary food. With many large divisions of the animal
kingdom mutual aid is the rule. Mutual aid is met with even
amidst the lowest animals, and we must be prepared to learn some
day, from the students of microscopical pond-life, facts of
unconscious mutual support, even from the life of
micro-organisms. Of course, our knowledge of the life of the
invertebrates, save the termites, the ants, and the bees, is
extremely limited; and yet, even as regards the lower animals, we
may glean a few facts of well-ascertained cooperation. The
numberless associations of locusts, vanessae, cicindelae,
cicadae, and so on, are practically quite unexplored; but the
very fact of their existence indicates that they must be composed
on about the same principles as the temporary associations of
ants or bees for purposes of migration. As to the beetles, we
have quite well-observed facts of mutual help amidst the burying
beetles (Necrophorus). They must have some decaying organic
matter to lay their eggs in, and thus to provide their larvae
with food; but that matter must not decay very rapidly. So they
are wont to bury in the ground the corpses of all kinds of small
animals which they occasionally find in their rambles. As a rule,
they live an isolated life, but when one of them has discovered
the corpse of a mouse or of a bird, which it hardly could manage
to bury itself, it calls four, six, or ten other beetles to
perform the operation with united efforts; if necessary, they
transport the corpse to a suitable soft ground; and they bury it
in a very considerate way, without quarrelling as to which of
them will enjoy the privilege of laying its eggs in the buried
corpse. And when Gleditsch attached a dead bird to a cross made
out of two sticks, or suspended a toad to a stick planted in the
soil, the little beetles would in the same friendly way combine
their intelligences to overcome the artifice of Man. The same
combination of efforts has been noticed among the dung-beetles.

Even among animals standing at a somewhat lower stage of
organization we may find like examples. Some land-crabs of the
West Indies and North America combine in large swarms in order to
travel to the sea and to deposit therein their spawn; and each
such migration implies concert, co-operation, and mutual support.
As to the big Molucca crab (Limulus), I was struck (in 1882, at
the Brighton Aquarium) with the extent of mutual assistance which
these clumsy animals are capable of bestowing upon a comrade in
case of need. One of them had fallen upon its back in a corner of
the tank, and its heavy saucepan-like carapace prevented it from
returning to its natural position, the more so as there was in
the corner an iron bar which rendered the task still more
difficult. Its comrades came to the rescue, and for one hour's
time I watched how they endeavoured to help their
fellow-prisoner. They came two at once, pushed their friend from
beneath, and after strenuous efforts succeeded in lifting it
upright; but then the iron bar would prevent them from achieving
the work of rescue, and the crab would again heavily fall upon
its back. After many attempts, one of the helpers would go in the
depth of the tank and bring two other crabs, which would begin
with fresh forces the same pushing and lifting of their helpless
comrade. We stayed in the Aquarium for more than two hours, and,
when leaving, we again came to cast a glance upon the tank: the
work of rescue still continued! Since I saw that, I cannot refuse
credit to the observation quoted by Dr. Erasmus Darwin--namely,
that "the common crab during the moulting season stations as
sentinel an unmoulted or hard-shelled individual to prevent
marine enemies from injuring moulted individuals in their
unprotected state."(5)

Facts illustrating mutual aid amidst the termites, the ants,
and the bees are so well known to the general reader, especially
through the works of Romanes, L. Buchner, and Sir John Lubbock,
that I may limit my remarks to a very few hints.(6) If we take
an ants' nest, we not only see that every description of
work-rearing of progeny, foraging, building, rearing of aphides,
and so on--is performed according to the principles of
voluntary mutual aid; we must also recognize, with Forel, that
the chief, the fundamental feature of the life of many species of
ants is the fact and the obligation for every ant of sharing its
food, already swallowed and partly digested, with every member of
the community which may apply for it. Two ants belonging to two
different species or to two hostile nests, when they occasionally
meet together, will avoid each other. But two ants belonging to
the same nest or to the same colony of nests will approach each
other, exchange a few movements with the antennae, and "if one of
them is hungry or thirsty, and especially if the other has its
crop full... it immediately asks for food." The individual thus
requested never refuses; it sets apart its mandibles, takes a
proper position, and regurgitates a drop of transparent fluid
which is licked up by the hungry ant. Regurgitating food for
other ants is so prominent a feature in the life of ants (at
liberty), and it so constantly recurs both for feeding hungry
comrades and for feeding larvae, that Forel considers the
digestive tube of the ants as consisting of two different parts,
one of which, the posterior, is for the special use of the
individual, and the other, the anterior part, is chiefly for the
use of the community. If an ant which has its crop full has been
selfish enough to refuse feeding a comrade, it will be treated as
an enemy, or even worse. If the refusal has been made while its
kinsfolk were fighting with some other species, they will fall
back upon the greedy individual with greater vehemence than even
upon the enemies themselves. And if an ant has not refused to
feed another ant belonging to an enemy species, it will be
treated by the kinsfolk of the latter as a friend. All this is
confirmed by most accurate observation and decisive
experiments.(7)

In that immense division of the animal kingdom which embodies
more than one thousand species, and is so numerous that the
Brazilians pretend that Brazil belongs to the ants, not to men,
competition amidst the members of the same nest, or the colony of
nests, does not exist. However terrible the wars between different
species, and whatever the atrocities committed at war-time,
mutual aid within the community, self-devotion grown into a
habit, and very often self-sacrifice for the common welfare, are
the rule. The ants and termites have renounced the "Hobbesian
war," and they are the better for it. Their wonderful nests,
their buildings, superior in relative size to those of man; their
paved roads and overground vaulted galleries; their spacious
halls and granaries; their corn-fields, harvesting and "malting"
of grain;(8) their, rational methods of nursing their eggs and
larvae, and of building special nests for rearing the aphides
whom Linnaeus so picturesquely described as "the cows of the
ants"; and, finally, their courage, pluck, and, superior
intelligence--all these are the natural outcome of the mutual
aid which they practise at every stage of their busy and
laborious lives. That mode of life also necessarily resulted in
the development of another essential feature of the life of ants:
the immense development of individual initiative which, in its
turn, evidently led to the development of that high and varied
intelligence which cannot but strike the human observer.(9)

If we knew no other facts from animal life than what we know
about the ants and the termites, we already might safely conclude
that mutual aid (which leads to mutual confidence, the first
condition for courage) and individual initiative (the first
condition for intellectual progress) are two factors infinitely
more important than mutual struggle in the evolution of the
animal kingdom. In fact, the ant thrives without having any of
the "protective" features which cannot be dispensed with by
animals living an isolated life. Its colour renders it
conspicuous to its enemies, and the lofty nests of many species
are conspicuous in the meadows and forests. It is not protected
by a hard carapace, and its stinging apparatus, however dangerous
when hundreds of stings are plunged into the flesh of an animal,
is not of a great value for individual defence; while the eggs
and larvae of the ants are a dainty for a great number of the
inhabitants of the forests. And yet the ants, in their thousands,
are not much destroyed by the birds, not even by the ant-eaters,
and they are dreaded by most stronger insects. When Forel emptied
a bagful of ants in a meadow, he saw that "the crickets ran away,
abandoning their holes to be sacked by the ants; the grasshoppers
and the crickets fled in all directions; the spiders and the
beetles abandoned their prey in order not to become prey
themselves; "even the nests of the wasps were taken by the ants,
after a battle during which many ants perished for the safety of
the commonwealth. Even the swiftest insects cannot escape, and
Forel often saw butterflies, gnats, flies, and so on, surprised
and killed by the ants. Their force is in mutual support and
mutual confidence. And if the ant--apart from the still higher
developed termites--stands at the very top of the whole class
of insects for its intellectual capacities; if its courage is
only equalled by the most courageous vertebrates; and if its
brain--to use Darwin's words--"is one of the most marvellous
atoms of matter in the world, perhaps more so than the brain of
man," is it not due to the fact that mutual aid has entirely
taken the place of mutual struggle in the communities of ants?

The same is true as regards the bees. These small insects,
which so easily might become the prey of so many birds, and whose
honey has so many admirers in all classes of animals from the
beetle to the bear, also have none of the protective features
derived from mimicry or otherwise, without which an isolatedly
living insect hardly could escape wholesale destruction; and yet,
owing to the mutual aid they practise, they obtain the wide
extension which we know and the intelligence we admire, By
working in common they multiply their individual forces; by
resorting to a temporary division of labour combined with the
capacity of each bee to perform every kind of work when required,
they attain such a degree of well-being and safety as no isolated
animal can ever expect to achieve however strong or well armed it
may be. In their combinations they are often more successful than
man, when he neglects to take advantage of a well-planned mutual
assistance. Thus, when a new swarm of bees is going to leave the
hive in search of a new abode, a number of bees will make a
preliminary exploration of the neighbourhood, and if they
discover a convenient dwelling-place--say, an old basket, or
anything of the kind--they will take possession of it, clean
it, and guard it, sometimes for a whole week, till the swarm
comes to settle therein. But how many human settlers will perish
in new countries simply for not having understood the necessity
of combining their efforts! By combining their individual
intelligences they succeed in coping with adverse circumstances,
even quite unforeseen and unusual, like those bees of the Paris
Exhibition which fastened with their resinous propolis the
shutter to a glass-plate fitted in the wall of their hive.
Besides, they display none of the sanguinary proclivities and
love of useless fighting with which many writers so readily endow
animals. The sentries which guard the entrance to the hive
pitilessly put to death the robbing bees which attempt entering
the hive; but those stranger bees which come to the hive by
mistake are left unmolested, especially if they come laden with
pollen, or are young individuals which can easily go astray.
There is no more warfare than is strictly required.

The sociability of the bees is the more instructive as
predatory instincts and laziness continue to exist among the bees
as well, and reappear each. time that their growth is favoured by
some circumstances. It is well known that there always are a
number of bees which prefer a life of robbery to the laborious
life of a worker; and that both periods of scarcity and periods
of an unusually rich supply of food lead to an increase of the
robbing class. When our crops are in and there remains but little
to gather in our meadows and fields, robbing bees become of more
frequent occurrence; while, on the other side, about the sugar
plantations of the West Indies and the sugar refineries of
Europe, robbery, laziness, and very often drunkenness become
quite usual with the bees. We thus see that anti-social instincts
continue to exist amidst the bees as well; but natural selection
continually must eliminate them, because in the long run the
practice of solidarity proves much more advantageous to the
species than the development of individuals endowed with
predatory inclinations. The cunningest and the shrewdest are
eliminated in favour of those who understand the advantages of
sociable life and mutual support.

Certainly, neither the ants, nor the bees, nor even the
termites, have risen to the conception of a higher solidarity
embodying the whole of the species. In that respect they
evidently have not attained a degree of development which we do
not find even among our political, scientific, and religious
leaders. Their social instincts hardly extend beyond the limits
of the hive or the nest. However, colonies of no less than two
hundred nests, belonging to two different species (Formica
exsecta and F. pressilabris) have been described by Forel on
Mount Tendre and Mount Saleve; and Forel maintains that each
member of these colonies recognizes every other member of the
colony, and that they all take part in common defence; while in
Pennsylvania Mr. MacCook saw a whole nation of from 1,600 to
1,700 nests of the mound-making ant, all living in perfect
intelligence; and Mr. Bates has described the hillocks of the
termites covering large surfaces in the "campos"--some of the
nests being the refuge of two or three different species, and
most of them being connected by vaulted galleries or
arcades.(10) Some steps towards the amalgamation of larger
divisions of the species for purposes of mutual protection are
thus met with even among the invertebrate animals.

Going now over to higher animals, we find far more instances
of undoubtedly conscious mutual help for all possible purposes,
though we must recognize at once that our knowledge even of the
life of higher animals still remains very imperfect. A large
number of facts have been accumulated by first-rate observers,
but there are whole divisions of the animal kingdom of which we
know almost nothing. Trustworthy information as regards fishes is
extremely scarce, partly owing to the difficulties of
observation, and partly because no proper attention has yet been
paid to the subject. As to the mammalia, Kessler already remarked
how little we know about their manners of life. Many of them are
nocturnal in their habits; others conceal themselves underground;
and those ruminants whose social life and migrations offer the
greatest interest do not let man approach their herds. It is
chiefly upon birds that we have the widest range of information,
and yet the social life of very many species remains but
imperfectly known. Still, we need not complain about the lack of
well-ascertained facts, as will be seen from the following.

I need not dwell upon the associations of male and female for
rearing their offspring, for providing it with food during their
first steps in life, or for hunting in common; though it may be
mentioned by the way that such associations are the rule even
with the least sociable carnivores and rapacious birds; and that
they derive a special interest from being the field upon which
tenderer feelings develop even amidst otherwise most cruel
animals. It may also be added that the rarity of associations
larger than that of the family among the carnivores and the birds
of prey, though mostly being the result of their very modes of
feeding, can also be explained to some extent as a consequence of
the change produced in the animal world by the rapid increase of
mankind. At any rate it is worthy of note that there are species
living a quite isolated life in densely-inhabited regions, while
the same species, or their nearest congeners, are gregarious in
uninhabited countries. Wolves, foxes, and several birds of prey
may be quoted as instances in point.

However, associations which do not extend beyond the family
bonds are of relatively small importance in our case, the more so
as we know numbers of associations for more general purposes,
such as hunting, mutual protection, and even simple enjoyment of
life. Audubon already mentioned that eagles occasionally
associate for hunting, and his description of the two bald
eagles, male and female, hunting on the Mississippi, is well
known for its graphic powers. But one of the most conclusive
observations of the kind belongs to Syevertsoff. Whilst studying
the fauna of the Russian Steppes, he once saw an eagle belonging
to an altogether gregarious species (the white-tailed eagle,
Haliactos albicilla) rising high in the air for half an hour it
was describing its wide circles in silence when at once its
piercing voice was heard. Its cry was soon answered by another
eagle which approached it, and was followed by a third, a fourth,
and so on, till nine or ten eagles came together and soon
disappeared. In the afternoon, Syevertsoff went to the place
whereto he saw the eagles flying; concealed by one of the
undulations of the Steppe, he approached them, and discovered
that they had gathered around the corpse of a horse. The old
ones, which, as a rule, begin the meal first--such are their
rules of propriety-already were sitting upon the haystacks of the
neighbourhood and kept watch, while the younger ones were
continuing the meal, surrounded by bands of crows. From this and
like observations, Syevertsoff concluded that the white-tailed
eagles combine for hunting; when they all have risen to a great
height they are enabled, if they are ten, to survey an area of at
least twenty-five miles square; and as soon as any one has
discovered something, he warns the others.(11) Of course, it
might be argued that a simple instinctive cry of the first eagle,
or even its movements, would have had the same effect of bringing
several eagles to the prey. but in this case there is strong
evidence in favour of mutual warning, because the ten eagles came
together before descending towards the prey, and Syevertsoff had
later on several opportunities of ascertaining that the
whitetailed eagles always assemble for devouring a corpse, and
that some of them (the younger ones first) always keep watch
while the others are eating. In fact, the white-tailed eagle--
one of the bravest and best hunters--is a gregarious bird
altogether, and Brehm says that when kept in captivity it very
soon contracts an attachment to its keepers.

Sociability is a common feature with very many other birds of
prey. The Brazilian kite, one of the most "impudent" robbers, is
nevertheless a most sociable bird. Its hunting associations have
been described by Darwin and other naturalists, and it is a fact
that when it has seized upon a prey which is too big, it calls
together five or six friends to carry it away. After a busy day,
when these kites retire for their night-rest to a tree or to the
bushes, they always gather in bands, sometimes coming together
from distances of ten or more miles, and they often are joined by
several other vultures, especially the percnopters, "their true
friends," D'Orbigny says. In another continent, in the
Transcaspian deserts, they have, according to Zarudnyi, the same
habit of nesting together. The sociable vulture, one of the
strongest vultures, has received its very name from its love of
society. They live in numerous bands, and decidedly enjoy
society; numbers of them join in their high flights for sport.
"They live in very good friendship," Le Vaillant says, "and in
the same cave I sometimes found as many as three nests close
together."(12) The Urubu vultures of Brazil are as, or perhaps
even more, sociable than rooks.(13) The little Egyptian vultures
live in close friendship. They play in bands in the air, they
come together to spend the night, and in the morning they all go
together to search for their food, and never does the slightest
quarrel arise among them; such is the testimony of Brehm, who had
plenty of opportunities of observing their life. The red-throated
falcon is also met with in numerous bands in the forests of
Brazil, and the kestrel (Tinnunculus cenchris), when it has left
Europe, and has reached in the winter the prairies and forests of
Asia, gathers in numerous societies. In the Steppes of South
Russia it is (or rather was) so sociable that Nordmann saw them
in numerous bands, with other falcons (Falco tinnunculus, F.
oesulon, and F. subbuteo), coming together every fine afternoon
about four o'clock, and enjoying their sports till late in the
night. They set off flying, all at once, in a quite straight
line, towards some determined point, and. having reached it,
immediately returned over the same line, to repeat the same
flight.(14)

To take flights in flocks for the mere pleasure of the
flight, is quite common among all sorts of birds. "In the Humber
district especially," Ch. Dixon writes, "vast flights of dunlins
often appear upon the mud-flats towards the end of August, and
remain for the winter.... The movements of these birds are most
interesting, as a vast flock wheels and spreads out or closes up
with as much precision as drilled troops. Scattered among them
are many odd stints and sanderlings and ringed-plovers."(15)

It would be quite impossible to enumerate here the various
hunting associations of birds; but the fishing associations of
the pelicans are certainly worthy of notice for the remarkable
order and intelligence displayed by these clumsy birds. They
always go fishing in numerous bands, and after having chosen an
appropriate bay, they form a wide half-circle in face of the
shore, and narrow it by paddling towards the shore, catching all
fish that happen to be enclosed in the circle. On narrow rivers
and canals they even divide into two parties, each of which draws
up on a half-circle, and both paddle to meet each other, just as
if two parties of men dragging two long nets should advance to
capture all fish taken between the nets when both parties come to
meet. As the night comes they fly to their resting-places--
always the same for each flock--and no one has ever seen them
fighting for the possession of either the bay or the resting
place. In South America they gather in flocks of from forty to
fifty thousand individuals, part of which enjoy sleep while the
others keep watch, and others again go fishing.(16) And finally,
I should be doing an injustice to the much-calumniated
house-sparrows if I did not mention how faithfully each of them
shares any food it discovers with all members of the society to
which it belongs. The fact was known to the Greeks, and it has
been transmitted to posterity how a Greek orator once exclaimed
(I quote from memory):--"While I am speaking to you a sparrow
has come to tell to other sparrows that a slave has dropped on
the floor a sack of corn, and they all go there to feed upon the
grain." The more, one is pleased to find this observation of old
confirmed in a recent little book by Mr. Gurney, who does not
doubt that the house sparrows always inform each other as to
where there is some food to steal; he says, "When a stack has
been thrashed ever so far from the yard, the sparrows in the yard
have always had their crops full of the grain."(17) True, the
sparrows are extremely particular in keeping their domains free
from the invasions of strangers; thus the sparrows of the Jardin
du Luxembourg bitterly fight all other sparrows which may attempt
to enjoy their turn of the garden and its visitors; but within
their own communities they fully practise mutual support, though
occasionally there will be of course some quarrelling even
amongst the best friends.

Hunting and feeding in common is so much the habit in the
feathered world that more quotations hardly would be needful: it
must be considered as an established fact. As to the force
derived from such associations, it is self-evident. The strongest
birds of prey are powerless in face of the associations of our
smallest bird pets. Even eagles--even the powerful and terrible
booted eagle, and the martial eagle, which is strong enough to
carry away a hare or a young antelope in its claws--are
compelled to abandon their prey to bands of those beggars the
kites, which give the eagle a regular chase as soon as they see
it in possession of a good prey. The kites will also give chase
to the swift fishing-hawk, and rob it of the fish it has
captured; but no one ever saw the kites fighting together for the
possession of the prey so stolen. On the Kerguelen Island, Dr.
Coues saw the gulls to Buphogus--the sea-hen of the sealers--
pursue make them disgorge their food, while, on the other side,
the gulls and the terns combined to drive away the sea-hen as
soon as it came near to their abodes, especially at
nesting-time.(18) The little, but extremely swift lapwings
(Vanellus cristatus) boldly attack the birds of prey. "To see
them attacking a buzzard, a kite, a crow, or an eagle, is one of
the most amusing spectacles. One feels that they are sure of
victory, and one sees the anger of the bird of prey. In such
circumstances they perfectly support one another, and their
courage grows with their numbers."(19) The lapwing has well
merited the name of a "good mother" which the Greeks gave to it,
for it never fails to protect other aquatic birds from the
attacks of their enemies. But even the little white wagtails
(Motacilla alba), whom we well know in our gardens and whose
whole length hardly attains eight inches, compel the sparrow-hawk
to abandon its hunt. "I often admired their courage and agility,"
the old Brehm wrote, "and I am persuaded that the falcon alone is
capable of capturing any of them.... When a band of wagtails has
compelled a bird of prey to retreat, they make the air resound
with their triumphant cries, and after that they separate." They
thus come together for the special purpose of giving chase to
their enemy, just as we see it when the whole bird-population of
a forest has been raised by the news that a nocturnal bird has
made its appearance during the day, and all together--birds of
prey and small inoffensive singers--set to chase the stranger
and make it return to its concealment.

What an immense difference between the force of a kite, a
buzzard or a hawk, and such small birds as the meadow-wagtail;
and yet these little birds, by their common action and courage,
prove superior to the powerfully-winged and armed robbers! In
Europe, the wagtails not only chase the birds of prey which might
be dangerous to them, but they chase also the fishing-hawk
"rather for fun than for doing it any harm;" while in India,
according to Dr. Jerdon's testimony, the jackdaws chase the
gowinda-kite "for simple matter of amusement." Prince Wied saw
the Brazilian eagle urubitinga surrounded by numberless flocks of
toucans and cassiques (a bird nearly akin to our rook), which
mocked it. "The eagle," he adds, "usually supports these insults
very quietly, but from time to time it will catch one of these
mockers." In all such cases the little birds, though very much
inferior in force to the bird of prey, prove superior to it by
their common action.(20)

However, the most striking effects of common life for the
security of the individual, for its enjoyment of life, and for
the development of its intellectual capacities, are seen in two
great families of birds, the cranes and the parrots. The cranes
are extremely sociable and live in most excellent relations, not
only with their congeners, but also with most aquatic birds.
Their prudence is really astonishing, so also their intelligence;
they grasp the new conditions in a moment, and act accordingly.
Their sentries always keep watch around a flock which is feeding
or resting, and the hunters know well how difficult it is to
approach them. If man has succeeded in surprising them, they will
never return to the same place without having sent out one single
scout first, and a party of scouts afterwards; and when the
reconnoitring party returns and reports that there is no danger,
a second group of scouts is sent out to verify the first report,
before the whole band moves. With kindred species the cranes
contract real friendship; and in captivity there is no bird, save
the also sociable and highly intelligent parrot, which enters
into such real friendship with man. "It sees in man, not a
master, but a friend, and endeavours to manifest it," Brehm
concludes from a wide personal experience. The crane is in
continual activity from early in the morning till late in the
night; but it gives a few hours only in the morning to the task
of searching its food, chiefly vegetable. All the remainder of
the day is given to society life. "It picks up small pieces of
wood or small stones, throws them in the air and tries to catch
them; it bends its neck, opens its wings, dances, jumps, runs
about, and tries to manifest by all means its good disposition of
mind, and always it remains graceful and beautiful."(21) As it
lives in society it has almost no enemies, and though Brehm
occasionally saw one of them captured by a crocodile, he wrote
that except the crocodile he knew no enemies of the crane. It
eschews all of them by its proverbial prudence; and it attains,
as a rule, a very old age. No wonder that for the maintenance of
the species the crane need not rear a numerous offspring; it
usually hatches but two eggs. As to its superior intelligence, it
is sufficient to say that all observers are unanimous in
recognizing that its intellectual capacities remind one very much
of those of man.

The other extremely sociable bird, the parrot, stands, as
known, at the very top of the whole feathered world for the
development of its intelligence. Brehm has so admirably summed up
the manners of life of the parrot, that I cannot do better than
translate the following sentence:--

"Except in the pairing season, they live in very numerous
societies or bands. They choose a place in the forest to stay
there, and thence they start every morning for their hunting
expeditions. The members of each band remain faithfully attached
to each other, and they share in common good or bad luck. All
together they repair in the morning to a field, or to a garden,
or to a tree, to feed upon fruits. They post sentries to keep
watch over the safety of the whole band, and are attentive to
their warnings. In case of danger, all take to flight, mutually
supporting each other, and all simultaneously return to their
resting-place. In a word, they always live closely united."

They enjoy society of other birds as well. In India, the jays and
crows come together from many miles round, to spend the night in
company with the parrots in the bamboo thickets. When the parrots
start hunting, they display the most wonderful intelligence,
prudence, and capacity of coping with circumstances. Take, for
instance, a band of white cacadoos in Australia. Before starting to
plunder a corn-field, they first send out a reconnoitring party
which occupies the highest trees in the vicinity of the field, while
other scouts perch upon the intermediate trees between the field and
the forest and transmit the signals. If the report runs "All right,"
a score of cacadoos will separate from the bulk of the band, take a
flight in the air, and then fly towards the trees nearest to the
field. They also will scrutinize the neighbourhood for a long while,
and only then will they give the signal for general advance, after
which the whole band starts at once and plunders the field in no
time. The Australian settlers have the greatest difficulties in
beguiling the prudence of the parrots; but if man, with all his art
and weapons, has succeeded in killing some of them, the cacadoos
become so prudent and watchful that they henceforward baffle all
stratagems.(22)

There can be no doubt that it is the practice of life in
society which enables the parrots to attain that very high level
of almost human intelligence and almost human feelings which we
know in them. Their high intelligence has induced the best
naturalists to describe some species, namely the grey parrot, as
the "birdman." As to their mutual attachment it is known that
when a parrot has been killed by a hunter, the others fly over
the corpse of their comrade with shrieks of complaints and
"themselves fall the victims of their friendship," as Audubon
said; and when two captive parrots, though belonging to two
different species, have contracted mutual friendship, the
accidental death of one of the two friends has sometimes been
followed by the death from grief and sorrow of the other friend.
It is no less evident that in their societies they find
infinitely more protection than they possibly might find in any
ideal development of beak and claw. Very few birds of prey or
mammals dare attack any but the smaller species of parrots, and
Brehm is absolutely right in saying of the parrots, as he also
says of the cranes and the sociable monkeys, that they hardly
have any enemies besides men; and he adds: "It is most probable
that the larger parrots succumb chiefly to old age rather than
die from the claws of any enemies." Only man, owing to his still
more superior intelligence and weapons, also derived from
association, succeeds in partially destroying them. Their very
longevity would thus appear as a result of their social life.
Could we not say the same as regards their wonderful memory,
which also must be favoured in its development by society--life
and by longevity accompanied by a full enjoyment of bodily and
mental faculties till a very old age?

As seen from the above, the war of each against all is not
the law of nature. Mutual aid is as much a law of nature as
mutual struggle, and that law will become still more apparent
when we have analyzed some other associations of birds and those
of the mammalia. A few hints as to the importance of the law of
mutual aid for the evolution of the animal kingdom have already
been given in the preceding pages; but their purport will still
better appear when, after having given a few more illustrations,
we shall be enabled presently to draw therefrom our conclusions.

NOTES:

1. Origin of Species, chap. iii, p. 62 of first edition.

2. Nineteenth Century, Feb. 1888, p. 165.

3. Leaving aside the pre-Darwinian writers, like Toussenel, Fee,
and many others, several works containing many striking instances
of mutual aid--chiefly, however, illustrating animal
intelligence were issued previously to that date. I may mention
those of Houzeau, Les facultes etales des animaux, 2 vols.,
Brussels, 1872; L. Buchner's Aus dem Geistesleben der Thiere, 2nd
ed. in 1877; and Maximilian Perty's Ueber das Seelenleben der
Thiere, Leipzig, 1876. Espinas published his most remarkable
work, Les Societes animales, in 1877, and in that work he pointed
out the importance of animal societies, and their bearing upon
the preservation of species, and entered upon a most valuable
discussion of the origin of societies. In fact, Espinas's book
contains all that has been written since upon mutual aid, and
many good things besides. If I nevertheless make a special
mention of Kessler's address, it is because he raised mutual aid
to the height of a law much more important in evolution than the
law of mutual struggle. The same ideas were developed next year
(in April 1881) by J. Lanessan in a lecture published in 1882
under this title: La lutte pour l'existence et l'association pour
la lutte. G. Romanes's capital work, Animal Intelligence, was
issued in 1882, and followed next year by the Mental Evolution in
Animals. About the same time (1883), Buchner published another
work, Liebe und Liebes-Leben in der Thierwelt, a second edition
of which was issued in 1885. The idea, as seen, was in the air.

4. Memoirs (Trudy) of the St. Petersburg Society of Naturalists,
vol. xi. 1880.

5. George J. Romanes's Animal Intelligence, 1st ed. p. 233.

6. Pierre Huber's Les fourmis indigees, Geneve, 1861; Forel's
Recherches sur les fourmis de la Suisse, Zurich, 1874, and J.T.
Moggridge's Harvesting Ants and Trapdoor Spiders, London, 1873
and 1874, ought to be in the hands of every boy and girl. See
also: Blanchard's Metamorphoses des Insectes, Paris, 1868; J.H.
Fabre's Souvenirs entomologiques, Paris, 1886; Ebrard's Etudes
des moeurs des fourmis, Geneve, 1864; Sir John Lubbock's Ants,
Bees, and Wasps, and so on.

7. Forel's Recherches, pp. 244, 275, 278. Huber's description of
the process is admirable. It also contains a hint as to the
possible origin of the instinct (popular edition, pp. 158, 160).
See Appendix II.

8. The agriculture of the ants is so wonderful that for a long
time it has been doubted. The fact is now so well proved by Mr.
Moggridge, Dr. Lincecum, Mr. MacCook, Col. Sykes, and Dr. Jerdon,
that no doubt is possible. See an excellent summary of evidence
in Mr. Romanes's work. See also Die Pilzgaerten einiger
Sud-Amerikanischen Ameisen, by Alf. Moeller, in Schimper's Botan.
Mitth. aus den Tropen, vi. 1893.

9. This second principle was not recognized at once. Former
observers often spoke of kings, queens, managers, and so on; but
since Huber and Forel have published their minute observations,
no doubt is possible as to the free scope left for every
individual's initiative in whatever the ants do, including their
wars.

10. H.W. Bates, The Naturalist on the River Amazons, ii. 59 seq.

11. N. Syevertsoff, Periodical Phenomena in the Life of Mammalia,
Birds, and Reptiles of Voroneje, Moscow, 1855 (in Russian).

12. A. Brehm, Life of Animals, iii. 477; all quotations after the
French edition.

13. Bates, p. 151.

14. Catalogue raisonne des oiseaux de la faune pontique, in
Demidoff's Voyage; abstracts in Brehm, iii. 360. During their
migrations birds of prey often associate. One flock, which H.
Seebohm saw crossing the Pyrenees, represented a curious
assemblage of "eight kites, one crane, and a peregrine falcon"
(The Birds of Siberia, 1901, p. 417).

15. Birds in the Northern Shires, p. 207.

16. Max. Perty, Ueber das Seelenleben der Thiere (Leipzig, 1876),
pp. 87, 103.

17. G. H. Gurney, The House-Sparrow (London, 1885), p. 5.

18. Dr. Elliot Coues, Birds of the Kerguelen Island, in
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, vol. xiii. No. 2, p. 11.

19. Brehm, iv. 567.

20. As to the house-sparrows, a New Zealand observer, Mr. T.W.
Kirk, described as follows the attack of these "impudent" birds
upon an "unfortunate" hawk.--"He heard one day a most unusual
noise, as though all the small birds of the country had joined in
one grand quarrel. Looking up, he saw a large hawk (C. gouldi--
a carrion feeder) being buffeted by a flock of sparrows. They
kept dashing at him in scores, and from all points at once. The
unfortunate hawk was quite powerless. At last, approaching some
scrub, the hawk dashed into it and remained there, while the
sparrows congregated in groups round the bush, keeping up a
constant chattering and noise" (Paper read before the New Zealand
Institute; Nature, Oct. 10, 1891).

21. Brehm, iv. 671 seq.

22. R. Lendenfeld, in Der zoologische Garten, 1889.






CHAPTER II

MUTUAL AID AMONG ANIMALS (continued)

Migrations of birds. Breeding associations. Autumn
societies. Mammals: small number of unsociable species. 
Hunting associations of wolves, lions, etc. Societies of
rodents; of ruminants; of monkeys. Mutual Aid in the struggle
for life. Darwin's arguments to prove the struggle for life
within the species. Natural checks to over-multiplication.
Supposed extermination of intermediate links. Elimination of
competition in Nature.





As soon as spring comes back to the temperate zone, myriads
and myriads of birds which are scattered over the warmer regions
of the South come together in numberless bands, and, full of
vigour and joy, hasten northwards to rear their offspring. Each
of our hedges, each grove, each ocean cliff, and each of the
lakes and ponds with which Northern America, Northern Europe, and
Northern Asia are dotted tell us at that time of the year the
tale of what mutual aid means for the birds; what force, energy,
and protection it confers to every living being, however feeble
and defenceless it otherwise might be. Take, for instance, one of
the numberless lakes of the Russian and Siberian Steppes. Its
shores are peopled with myriads of aquatic birds, belonging to at
least a score of different species, all living in perfect
peace--all protecting one another.

"For several hundred yards from the shore the air is filled with
gulls and terns, as with snow-flakes on a winter day. Thousands
of plovers and sand-coursers run over the beach, searching their.
food, whistling, and simply enjoying life. Further on, on almost
each wave, a duck is rocking, while higher up you notice the
flocks of the Casarki ducks. Exuberant life swarms
everywhere."(1)

And here are the robbers--the strongest, the most cunning
ones, those "ideally organized for robbery." And you hear their
hungry, angry, dismal cries as for hours in succession they watch
the opportunity of snatching from this mass of living beings one
single unprotected individual. But as soon as they approach,
their presence is signalled by dozens of voluntary sentries, and
hundreds of gulls and terns set to chase the robber. Maddened by
hunger, the robber soon abandons his usual precautions: he
suddenly dashes into the living mass; but, attacked from all
sides, he again is compelled to retreat. From sheer despair he
falls upon the wild ducks; but the intelligent, social birds
rapidly gather in a flock and fly away if the robber is an erne;
they plunge into the lake if it is a falcon; or they raise a
cloud of water-dust and bewilder the assailant if it is a
kite.(2) And while life continues to swarm on the lake, the
robber flies away with cries of anger, and looks out for carrion,
or for a young bird or a field-mouse not yet used to obey in time
the warnings of its comrades. In the face of an exuberant life,
the ideally-armed robber must be satisfied with the off-fall of
that life.

Further north, in the Arctic archipelagoes,

"you may sail along the coast for many miles and see all the
ledges, all the cliffs and corners of the mountain-sides, up to a
height of from two to five hundred feet, literally covered with
sea-birds, whose white breasts show against the dark rocks as if
the rocks were closely sprinkled with chalk specks. The air, near
and far, is, so to say, full with fowls."(3)

Each of such "bird-mountains" is a living illustration of mutual
aid, as well as of the infinite variety of characters, individual
and specific, resulting from social life. The oyster-catcher is
renowned for its readiness to attack the birds of prey. The barge
is known for its watchfulness, and it easily becomes the leader
of more placid birds. The turnstone, when surrounded by comrades
belonging to more energetic species, is a rather timorous bird;
but it undertakes to keep watch for the security of the
commonwealth when surrounded by smaller birds. Here you have the
dominative swans; there, the extremely sociable kittiwake-gulls,
among whom quarrels are rare and short; the prepossessing polar
guillemots, which continually caress each other; the egoist
she-goose, who has repudiated the orphans of a killed comrade;
and, by her side, another female who adopts any one's orphans,
and now paddles surrounded by fifty or sixty youngsters, whom she
conducts and cares for as if they all were her own breed. Side by
side with the penguins, which steal one another's eggs, you have
the dotterels, whose family relations are so "charming and
touching" that even passionate hunters recoil from shooting a
female surrounded by her young ones; or the eider-ducks, among
which (like the velvet-ducks, or the coroyas of the Savannahs)
several females hatch together in the same, nest. or the lums,
which sit in turn upon a common covey. Nature is variety itself,
offering all possible varieties of characters, from the basest to
the highest: and that is why she cannot be depicted by any
sweeping assertion. Still less can she be judged from the
moralist's point of view, because the views of the moralist are
themselves a result--mostly unconscious--of the observation
of Nature.

Coming together at nesting-time is so common with most birds
that more examples are scarcely needed. Our trees are crowned
with groups of crows' nests; our hedges are full of nests of
smaller birds; our farmhouses give shelter to colonies of
swallows; our old towers are the refuge of hundreds of nocturnal
birds; and pages might be filled with the most charming
descriptions of the peace and harmony which prevail in almost all
these nesting associations. As to the protection derived by the
weakest birds from their unions, it is evident. That excellent
observer, Dr. Coues, saw, for instance, the little cliff-swallows
nesting in the immediate neighbourhood of the prairie falcon
(Falco polyargus). The falcon had its nest on the top of one of
the minarets of clay which are so common in the canons of
Colorado, while a colony of swallows nested just beneath. The
little peaceful birds had no fear of their rapacious neighbour;
they never let it approach to their colony. They immediately
surrounded it and chased it, so that it had to make off at
once.(4)

Life in societies does not cease when the nesting period is
over; it begins then in a new form. The young broods gather in
societies of youngsters, generally including several species.
Social life is practised at that time chiefly for its own sake--
partly for security, but chiefly for the pleasures derived from
it. So we see in our forests the societies formed by the young
nuthatchers (Sitta caesia), together with tit-mouses,
chaffinches, wrens, tree-creepers, or some wood-peckers.(5) In
Spain the swallow is met with in company with kestrels,
fly-catchers, and even pigeons. In the Far West of America the
young horned larks live in large societies, together with another
lark (Sprague's), the skylark, the Savannah sparrow, and several
species of buntings and longspurs.(6) In fact, it would be much
easier to describe the species which live isolated than to simply
name those species which join the autumnal societies of young
birds--not for hunting or nesting purposes, but simply to enjoy
life in society and to spend their time in plays and sports,
after having given a few hours every day to find their daily
food.

And, finally, we have that immense display of mutual aid
among birds-their migrations--which I dare not even enter upon
in this place. Sufficient to say that birds which have lived for
months in small bands scattered over a wide territory gather in
thousands; they come together at a given place, for several days
in succession, before they start, and they evidently discuss the
particulars of the journey. Some species will indulge every
afternoon in flights preparatory to the long passage. All wait
for their tardy congeners, and finally they start in a certain
well chosen direction--a fruit of accumulated collective
experience--the strongest flying at the head of the band, and
relieving one another in that difficult task. They cross the seas
in large bands consisting of both big and small birds, and when
they return next spring they repair to the same spot, and, in
most cases, each of them takes possession of the very same nest
which it had built or repaired the previous year.(7)

This subject is so vast, and yet so imperfectly studied; it
offers so many striking illustrations of mutual-aid habits,
subsidiary to the main fact of migration--each of which would,
however, require a special study--that I must refrain from
entering here into more details. I can only cursorily refer to
the numerous and animated gatherings of birds which take place,
always on the same spot, before they begin their long journeys
north or south, as also those which one sees in the north, after
the birds have arrived at their breeding-places on the Yenisei or
in the northern counties of England. For many days in succession--
sometimes one month--they will come together every morning
for one hour, before flying in search of food--perhaps
discussing the spot where they are going to build their
nests.(8) And if, during the migration, their columns are
overtaken by a storm, birds of the most different species will be
brought together by common misfortune. The birds which are not
exactly migratory, but slowly move northwards and southwards with
the seasons, also perform these peregrinations in flocks. So far
from migrating isolately, in order to secure for each separate
individual the advantages of better food or shelter which are to
be found in another district--they always wait for each other,
and gather in flocks, before they move north or south, in
accordance with the season.(9)

Going now over to mammals, the first thing which strikes us
is the overwhelming numerical predominance of social species over
those few carnivores which do not associate. The plateaus, the
Alpine tracts, and the Steppes of the Old and New World are
stocked with herds of deer, antelopes, gazelles, fallow deer,
buffaloes, wild goats and sheep, all of which are sociable
animals. When the Europeans came to settle in America, they found
it so densely peopled with buffaloes, that pioneers had to stop
their advance when a column of migrating buffaloes came to cross
the route they followed; the march past of the dense column
lasting sometimes for two and three days. And when the Russians
took possession of Siberia they found it so densely peopled with
deer, antelopes, squirrels, and other sociable animals, that the
very conquest of Siberia was nothing but a hunting expedition
which lasted for two hundred years; while the grass plains of
Eastern Africa are still covered with herds composed of zebra,
the hartebeest, and other antelopes.

Not long ago the small streams of Northern America and
Northern Siberia were peopled with colonies of beavers, and up to
the seventeenth century like colonies swarmed in Northern Russia.
The flat lands of the four great continents are still covered
with countless colonies of mice, ground-squirrels, marmots, and
other rodents. In the lower latitudes of Asia and Africa the
forests are still the abode of numerous families of elephants,
rhinoceroses, and numberless societies of monkeys. In the far
north the reindeer aggregate in numberless herds; while still
further north we find the herds of the musk-oxen and numberless
bands of polar foxes. The coasts of the ocean are enlivened by
flocks of seals and morses; its waters, by shoals of sociable
cetaceans; and even in the depths of the great plateau of Central
Asia we find herds of wild horses, wild donkeys, wild camels, and
wild sheep. All these mammals live in societies and nations
sometimes numbering hundreds of thousands of individuals,
although now, after three centuries of gunpowder civilization, we
find but the debris of the immense aggregations of old. How
trifling, in comparison with them, are the numbers of the
carnivores! And how false, therefore, is the view of those who
speak of the animal world as if nothing were to be seen in it but
lions and hyenas plunging their bleeding teeth into the flesh of
their victims! One might as well imagine that the whole of human
life is nothing but a succession of war massacres.

Association and mutual aid are the rule with mammals. We find
social habits even among the carnivores, and we can only name the
cat tribe (lions, tigers, leopards, etc.) as a division the
members of which decidedly prefer isolation to society, and are
but seldom met with even in small groups. And yet, even among
lions "this is a very common practice to hunt in company."(10)
The two tribes of the civets (Viverridae) and the weasels
(Mustelidae) might also be characterized by their isolated life,
but it is a fact that during the last century the common weasel
was more sociable than it is now; it was seen then in larger
groups in Scotland and in the Unterwalden canton of Switzerland.
As to the great tribe of the dogs, it is eminently sociable, and
association for hunting purposes may be considered as eminently
characteristic of its numerous species. It is well known, in
fact, that wolves gather in packs for hunting, and Tschudi left
an excellent description of how they draw up in a half-circle,
surround a cow which is grazing on a mountain slope, and then,
suddenly appearing with a loud barking, make it roll in the
abyss.(11) Audubon, in the thirties, also saw the Labrador
wolves hunting in packs, and one pack following a man to his
cabin, and killing the dogs. During severe winters the packs of
wolves grow so numerous as to become a danger for human
settlements, as was the case in France some five-and-forty years
ago. In the Russian Steppes they never attack the horses
otherwise than in packs; and yet they have to sustain bitter
fights, during which the horses (according to Kohl's testimony)
sometimes assume offensive warfare, and in such cases, if the
wolves do not retreat promptly, they run the risk of being
surrounded by the horses and killed by their hoofs. The
prairie-wolves (Canis latrans) are known to associate in bands of
from twenty to thirty individuals when they chase a buffalo
occasionally separated from its herd.(12) Jackals, which are
most courageous and may be considered as one of the most
intelligent representatives of the dog tribe, always hunt in
packs; thus united, they have no fear of the bigger
carnivores.(13) As to the wild dogs of Asia (the Kholzuns, or
Dholes), Williamson saw their large packs attacking all larger
animals save elephants and rhinoceroses, and overpowering bears
and tigers. Hyenas always live in societies and hunt in packs,
and the hunting organizations of the painted lycaons are highly
praised by Cumming. Nay, even foxes, which, as a rule, live
isolated in our civilized countries, have been seen combining for
hunting purposes.(14) As to the polar fox, it is--or rather
was in Steller's time--one of the most sociable animals; and
when one reads Steller's description of the war that was waged by
Behring's unfortunate crew against these intelligent small
animals, one does not know what to wonder at most: the
extraordinary intelligence of the foxes and the mutual aid they
displayed in digging out food concealed under cairns, or stored
upon a pillar (one fox would climb on its top and throw the food
to its comrades beneath), or the cruelty of man, driven to
despair by the numerous packs of foxes. Even some bears live in
societies where they are not disturbed by man. Thus Steller saw
the black bear of Kamtchatka in numerous packs, and the polar
bears are occasionally found in small groups. Even the
unintelligent insectivores do not always disdain association.

However, it is especially with the rodents, the ungulata, and
the ruminants that we find a highly developed practice of mutual
aid. The squirrels are individualist to a great extent. Each of
them builds its own comfortable nest, and accumulates its own
provision. Their inclinations are towards family life, and Brehm
found that a family of squirrels is never so happy as when the
two broods of the same year can join together with their parents
in a remote corner of a forest. And yet they maintain social
relations. The inhabitants of the separate nests remain in a
close intercourse, and when the pine-cones become rare in the
forest they inhabit, they emigrate in bands. As to the black
squirrels of the Far West, they are eminently sociable. Apart
from the few hours given every day to foraging, they spend their
lives in playing in numerous parties. And when they multiply too
rapidly in a region, they assemble in bands, almost as numerous
as those of locusts, and move southwards, devastating the
forests, the fields, and the gardens; while foxes, polecats,
falcons, and nocturnal birds of prey follow their thick columns
and live upon the individuals remaining behind. The ground-squirrel--
a closely-akin genus--is still more sociable. It is given to
hoarding, and stores up in its subterranean halls large amounts
of edible roots and nuts, usually plundered by man in the autumn.
According to some observers, it must know something of the joys
of a miser. And yet it remains sociable. It always lives in large
villages, and Audubon, who opened some dwellings of the hackee
in the winter, found several individuals in the same apartment;
they must have stored it with common efforts.

The large tribe, of the marmots, which includes the three
large genuses of Arctomys, Cynomys, and Spermophilus, is still
more sociable and still more intelligent. They also prefer having
each one its own dwelling; but they live in big villages. That
terrible enemy of the crops of South Russia--the souslik--of
which some ten millions are exterminated every year by man alone,
lives in numberless colonies; and while the Russian provincial
assemblies gravely discuss the means of getting rid of this enemy
of society, it enjoys life in its thousands in the most joyful
way. Their play is so charming that no observer could refrain
from paying them a tribute of praise, and from mentioning the
melodious concerts arising from the sharp whistlings of the males
and the melancholic whistlings of the females, before--suddenly
returning to his citizen's duties--he begins inventing the most
diabolic means for the extermination of the little robbers. All
kinds of rapacious birds and beasts of prey having proved
powerless, the last word of science in this warfare is the
inoculation of cholera! The villages of the prairie-dogs in
America are one of the loveliest sights. As far as the eye can
embrace the prairie, it sees heaps of earth, and on each of them
a prairie-dog stands, engaged in a lively conversation with its
neighbours by means of short barkings. As soon as the approach of
man is signalled, all plunge in a moment into their dwellings;
all have disappeared as by enchantment. But if the danger is
over, the little creatures soon reappear. Whole families come out
of their galleries and indulge in play. The young ones scratch
one another, they worry one another, and display their
gracefulness while standing upright, and in the meantime the old
ones keep watch. They go visiting one another, and the beaten
footpaths which connect all their heaps testify to the frequency
of the visitations. In short, the best naturalists have written
some of their best pages in describing the associations of the
prairie-dogs of America, the marmots of the Old World, and the
polar marmots of the Alpine regions. And yet, I must make, as
regards the marmots, the same remark as I have made when speaking
of the bees. They have maintained their fighting instincts, and
these instincts reappear in captivity. But in their big
associations, in the face of free Nature, the unsociable
instincts have no opportunity to develop, and the general result
is peace and harmony.

Even such harsh animals as the rats, which continually fight
in our cellars, are sufficiently intelligent not to quarrel when
they plunder our larders, but to aid one another in their
plundering expeditions and migrations, and even to feed their
invalids. As to the beaver-rats or musk-rats of Canada, they are
extremely sociable. Audubon could not but admire "their peaceful
communities, which require only being left in peace to enjoy
happiness." Like all sociable animals, they are lively and
playful, they easily combine with other species, and they have
attained a very high degree of intellectual development. In their
villages, always disposed on the shores of lakes and rivers, they
take into account the changing level of water; their domeshaped
houses, which are built of beaten clay interwoven with reeds,
have separate corners for organic refuse, and their halls are
well carpeted at winter time; they are warm, and, nevertheless,
well ventilated. As to the beavers, which are endowed, as known,
with a most sympathetic character, their astounding dams and
villages, in which generations live and die without knowing of
any enemies but the otter and man, so wonderfully illustrate what
mutual aid can achieve for the security of the species, the
development of social habits, and the evolution of intelligence,
that they are familiar to all interested in animal life. Let me
only remark that with the beavers, the muskrats, and some other
rodents, we already find the feature which will also be
distinctive of human communities--that is, work in common.

I pass in silence the two large families which include the
jerboa, the chinchilla, the biscacha, and the tushkan, or
underground hare of South Russia, though all these small rodents
might be taken as excellent illustrations of the pleasures
derived by animals from social life.(15) Precisely, the
pleasures; because it is extremely difficult to say what brings
animals together--the needs of mutual protection, or simply the
pleasure of feeling surrounded by their congeners. At any rate,
our common hares, which do not gather in societies for life in
common, and which are not even endowed with intense parental
feelings, cannot live without coming together for play. Dietrich
de Winckell, who is considered to be among the best acquainted
with the habits of hares, describes them as passionate players,
becoming so intoxicated by their play that a hare has been known
to take an approaching fox for a playmate.(16) As to the rabbit,
it lives in societies, and its family life is entirely built upon
the image of the old patriarchal family; the young ones being
kept in absolute obedience to the father and even the
grandfather.(17) And here we have the example of two very
closely-allied species which cannot bear each other--not
because they live upon nearly the same food, as like cases are
too often explained, but most probably because the passionate,
eminently-individualist hare cannot make friends with that
placid, quiet, and submissive creature, the rabbit. Their tempers
are too widely different not to be an obstacle to friendship.

Life in societies is again the rule with the large family of
horses, which includes the wild horses and donkeys of Asia, the
zebras, the mustangs, the cimarrones of the Pampas, and the
half-wild horses of Mongolia and Siberia. They all live in
numerous associations made up of many studs, each of which
consists of a number of mares under the leadership of a male.
These numberless inhabitants of the Old and the New World, badly
organized on the whole for resisting both their numerous enemies
and the adverse conditions of climate, would soon have
disappeared from the surface of the earth were it not for their
sociable spirit. When a beast of prey approaches them, several
studs unite at once; they repulse the beast and sometimes chase
it: and neither the wolf nor the bear, not even the lion, can
capture a horse or even a zebra as long as they are not detached
from the herd. When a drought is burning the grass in the
prairies, they gather in herds of sometimes 10,000 individuals
strong, and migrate. And when a snow-storm rages in the Steppes,
each stud keeps close together, and repairs to a protected
ravine. But if confidence disappears, or the group has been
seized by panic, and disperses, the horses perish and the
survivors are found after the storm half dying from fatigue.
Union is their chief arm in the struggle for life, and man is
their chief enemy. Before his increasing numbers the ancestors of
our domestic horse (the Equus Przewalskii, so named by Polyakoff)
have preferred to retire to the wildest and least accessible
plateaus on the outskirts of Thibet, where they continue to live,
surrounded by carnivores, under a climate as bad as that of the
Arctic regions, but in a region inaccessible to man.(18)

Many striking illustrations of social life could be taken
from the life of the reindeer, and especially of that large
division of ruminants which might include the roebucks, the
fallow deer, the antelopes, the gazelles, the ibex, and, in fact,
the whole of the three numerous families of the Antelopides, the
Caprides, and the Ovides. Their watchfulness over the safety of
their herds against attacks of carnivores; the anxiety displayed
by all individuals in a herd of chamois as long as all of them
have not cleared a difficult passage over rocky cliffs. the
adoption of orphans; the despair of the gazelle whose mate, or
even comrade of the same sex, has been killed; the plays of the
youngsters, and many other features, could be mentioned. But
perhaps the most striking illustration of mutual support is given
by the occasional migrations of fallow deer, such as I saw once
on the Amur. When I crossed the high plateau and its border
ridge, the Great Khingan, on my way from Transbaikalia to
Merghen, and further travelled over the high prairies on my way
to the Amur, I could ascertain how thinly-peopled with fallow
deer these mostly uninhabited regions are.(19) Two years later I
was travelling up the Amur, and by the end of October reached the
lower end of that picturesque gorge which the Amur pierces in the
Dousse-alin (Little Khingan) before it enters the lowlands where
it joins the Sungari. I found the Cossacks in the villages of
that gorge in the greatest excitement, because thousands and
thousands of fallow deer were crossing the Amur where it is
narrowest, in order to reach the lowlands. For several days in
succession, upon a length of some forty miles up the river, the
Cossacks were butchering the deer as they crossed the Amur, in
which already floated a good deal of ice. Thousands were killed
every day, and the exodus nevertheless continued. Like migrations
were never seen either before or since, and this one must have
been called for by an early and heavy snow-fall in the Great
Khingan, which compelled the deer to make a desperate attempt at
reaching the lowlands in the east of the Dousse mountains.
Indeed, a few days later the Dousse-alin was also buried under
snow two or three feet deep. Now, when one imagines the immense
territory (almost as big as Great Britain) from which the
scattered groups of deer must have gathered for a migration which
was undertaken under the pressure of exceptional circumstances,
and realizes the difficulties which had to be overcome before all
the deer came to the common idea of crossing the Amur further
south, where it is narrowest, one cannot but deeply admire the
amount of sociability displayed by these intelligent animals. The
fact is not the less striking if we remember that the buffaloes
of North America displayed the same powers of combination. One
saw them grazing in great numbers in the plains, but these
numbers were made up by an infinity of small groups which never
mixed together. And yet, when necessity arose, all groups,
however scattered over an immense territory, came together and
made up those immense columns, numbering hundreds of thousands of
individuals, which I mentioned on a preceding page.

I also ought to say a few words at least about the "compound
families" of the elephants, their mutual attachment, their
deliberate ways in posting sentries, and the feelings of sympathy
developed by such a life of close mutual support.(20) I might
mention the sociable feelings of those disreputable creatures the
wild boars, and find a word of praise for their powers of
association in the case of an attack by a beast of prey.(21) The
hippopotamus and the rhinoceros, too, would occupy a place in a
work devoted to animal sociability. Several striking pages might
be given to the sociability and mutual attachment of the seals
and the walruses; and finally, one might mention the most
excellent feelings existing among the sociable cetaceans. But I
have to say yet a few words about the societies of monkeys, which
acquire an additional interest from their being the link which
will bring us to the societies of primitive men.

It is hardly needful to say that those mammals, which stand
at the very top of the animal world and most approach man by
their structure and intelligence, are eminently sociable.
evidently we must be prepared to meet with all varieties of
character and habits in so great a division of the animal kingdom
which includes hundreds of species. But, all things considered,
it must be said that sociability, action in common, mutual
protection, and a high development of those feelings which are
the necessary outcome of social life, are characteristic of most
monkeys and apes. From the smallest species to the biggest ones,
sociability is a rule to which we know but a few exceptions. The
nocturnal apes prefer isolated life; the capuchins (Cebus
capucinus), the monos, and the howling monkeys live but in small
families; and the orang-outans have never been seen by A.R.
Wallace otherwise than either solitary or in very small groups of
three or four individuals, while the gorillas seem never to join
in bands. But all the remainder of the monkey tribe--the
chimpanzees, the sajous, the sakis, the mandrills, the baboons,
and so on--are sociable in the highest degree. They live in
great bands, and even join with other species than their own.
Most of them become quite unhappy when solitary. The cries of
distress of each one of the band immediately bring together the
whole of the band, and they boldly repulse the attacks of most
carnivores and birds of prey. Even eagles do not dare attack
them. They plunder our fields always in bands--the old ones
taking care for the safety of the commonwealth. The little
tee-tees, whose childish sweet faces so much struck Humboldt,
embrace and protect one another when it rains, rolling their
tails over the necks of their shivering comrades. Several species
display the greatest solicitude for their wounded, and do not
abandon a wounded comrade during a retreat till they have
ascertained that it is dead and that they are helpless to restore
it to life. Thus James Forbes narrated in his Oriental Memoirs a
fact of such resistance in reclaiming from his hunting party the
dead body of a female monkey that one fully understands why "the
witnesses of this extraordinary scene resolved never again to
fire at one of the monkey race."(22) In some species several
individuals will combine to overturn a stone in order to search
for ants' eggs under it. The hamadryas not only post sentries,
but have been seen making a chain for the transmission of the
spoil to a safe place; and their courage is well known. Brehm's
description of the regular fight which his caravan had to sustain
before the hamadryas would let it resume its journey in the
valley of the Mensa, in Abyssinia, has become classical.(23) The
playfulness of the tailed apes and the mutual attachment which
reigns in the families of chimpanzees also are familiar to the
general reader. And if we find among the highest apes two
species, the orang-outan and the gorilla, which are not sociable,
we must remember that both--limited as they are to very small
areas, the one in the heart of Africa, and the other in the two
islands of Borneo and Sumatra have all the appearance of being
the last remnants of formerly much more numerous species. The
gorilla at least seems to have been sociable in olden times, if
the apes mentioned in the Periplus really were gorillas.


We thus see, even from the above brief review, that life in
societies is no exception in the animal world; it is the rule,
the law of Nature, and it reaches its fullest development with
the higher vertebrates. Those species which live solitary, or in
small families only, are relatively few, and their numbers are
limited. Nay, it appears very probable that, apart from a few
exceptions, those birds and mammals which are not gregarious now,
were living in societies before man multiplied on the earth and
waged a permanent war against them, or destroyed the sources from
which they formerly derived food. "On ne s'associe pas pour
mourir," was the sound remark of Espinas; and Houzeau, who knew
the animal world of some parts of America when it was not yet
affected by man, wrote to the same effect.

Association is found in the animal world at all degrees of
evolution; and, according to the grand idea of Herbert Spencer,
so brilliantly developed in Perrier's Colonies Animales, colonies
are at the very origin of evolution in the animal kingdom. But,
in proportion as we ascend the scale of evolution, we see
association growing more and more conscious. It loses its purely
physical character, it ceases to be simply instinctive, it
becomes reasoned. With the higher vertebrates it is periodical,
or is resorted to for the satisfaction of a given want--
propagation of the species, migration, hunting, or mutual
defence. It even becomes occasional, when birds associate against
a robber, or mammals combine, under the pressure of exceptional
circumstances, to emigrate. In this last case, it becomes a
voluntary deviation from habitual moods of life. The combination
sometimes appears in two or more degrees--the family first,
then the group, and finally the association of groups, habitually
scattered, but uniting in case of need, as we saw it with the
bisons and other ruminants. It also takes higher forms,
guaranteeing more independence to the individual without
depriving it of the benefits of social life. With most rodents
the individual has its own dwelling, which it can retire to when
it prefers being left alone; but the dwellings are laid out in
villages and cities, so as to guarantee to all inhabitants the
benefits and joys of social life. And finally, in several
species, such as rats, marmots, hares, etc., sociable life is
maintained notwithstanding the quarrelsome or otherwise egotistic
inclinations of the isolated individual. Thus it is not imposed,
as is the case with ants and bees, by the very physiological
structure of the individuals; it is cultivated for the benefits
of mutual aid, or for the sake of its pleasures. And this, of
course, appears with all possible gradations and with the
greatest variety of individual and specific characters--the
very variety of aspects taken by social life being a consequence,
and for us a further proof, of its generality.(24)

Sociability--that is, the need of the animal of associating
with its like--the love of society for society's sake, combined
with the "joy of life," only now begins to receive due attention
from the zoologists.(25) We know at the present time that all
animals, beginning with the ants, going on to the birds, and
ending with the highest mammals, are fond of plays, wrestling,
running after each other, trying to capture each other, teasing
each other, and so on. And while many plays are, so to speak, a
school for the proper behaviour of the young in mature life,
there are others, which, apart from their utilitarian purposes,
are, together with dancing and singing, mere manifestations of an
excess of forces--"the joy of life," and a desire to
communicate in some way or another with other individuals of the
same or of other species--in short, a manifestation of
sociability proper, which is a distinctive feature of all the
animal world.(26) Whether the feeling be fear, experienced at
the appearance of a bird of prey, or "a fit of gladness" which
bursts out when the animals are in good health and especially
when young, or merely the desire of giving play to an excess of
impressions and of vital power--the necessity of communicating
impressions, of playing, of chattering, or of simply feeling the
proximity of other kindred living beings pervades Nature, and is,
as much as any other physiological function, a distinctive
feature of life and impressionability. This need takes a higher
development and attains a more beautiful expression in mammals,
especially amidst their young, and still more among the birds;
but it pervades all Nature, and has been fully observed by the
best naturalists, including Pierre Huber, even amongst the ants,
and it is evidently the same instinct which brings together the
big columns of butterflies which have been referred to already.

The habit of coming together for dancing and of decorating
the places where the birds habitually perform their dances is, of
course, well known from the pages that Darwin gave to this
subject in The Descent of Man (ch. xiii). Visitors of the London
Zoological Gardens also know the bower of the satin bower-bird.
But this habit of dancing seems to be much more widely spread
than was formerly believed, and Mr. W. Hudson gives in his
master-work on La Plata the most interesting description, which
must be read in the original, of complicated dances, performed by
quite a number of birds: rails, jacanas, lapwings, and so on.

The habit of singing in concert, which exists in several
species of birds, belongs to the same category of social
instincts. It is most strikingly developed with the chakar
(Chauna chavarris), to which the English have given the most
unimaginative misnomer of "crested screamer." These birds
sometimes assemble in immense flocks, and in such cases they
frequently sing all in concert. W.H. Hudson found them once in
countless numbers, ranged all round a pampas lake in well-defined
flocks, of about 500 birds in each flock.

"Presently," he writes, "one flock near me began singing, and
continued their powerful chant for three or four minutes; when
they ceased the next flock took up the strains, and after it the
next, and so on, until once more the notes of the flocks on the
opposite shore came floating strong and clear across the water--
then passed away, growing fainter and fainter, until once more
the sound approached me travelling round to my side again."

On another occasion the same writer saw a whole plain covered
with an endless flock of chakars, not in close order, but
scattered in pairs and small groups. About nine o'clock in the
evening, "suddenly the entire multitude of birds covering the
marsh for miles around burst forth in a tremendous evening
song.... It was a concert well worth riding a hundred miles to
hear."(27) It may be added that like all sociable animals, the
chakar easily becomes tame and grows very attached to man." They
are mild-tempered birds, and very rarely quarrel"--we are told--
although they are well provided with formidable weapons. Life
in societies renders these weapons useless.

That life in societies is the most powerful weapon in the
struggle for life, taken in its widest sense, has been
illustrated by several examples on the foregoing pages, and could
be illustrated by any amount of evidence, if further evidence
were required. Life in societies enables the feeblest insects,
the feeblest birds, and the feeblest mammals to resist, or to
protect themselves from, the most terrible birds and beasts of
prey; it permits longevity; it enables the species to rear its
progeny with the least waste of energy and to maintain its
numbers albeit a very slow birth-rate; it enables the gregarious
animals to migrate in search of new abodes. Therefore, while
fully admitting that force, swiftness, protective colours,
cunningness, and endurance to hunger and cold, which are
mentioned by Darwin and Wallace, are so many qualities making the
individual, or the species, the fittest under certain
circumstances, we maintain that under any circumstances
sociability is the greatest advantage in the struggle for life.
Those species which willingly or unwillingly abandon it are
doomed to decay; while those animals which know best how to
combine, have the greatest chances of survival and of further
evolution, although they may be inferior to others in each of the
faculties enumerated by Darwin and Wallace, save the intellectual
faculty. The highest vertebrates, and especially mankind, are the
best proof of this assertion. As to the intellectual faculty,
while every Darwinist will agree with Darwin that it is the most
powerful arm in the struggle for life, and the most powerful
factor of further evolution, he also will admit that intelligence
is an eminently social faculty. Language, imitation, and
accumulated experience are so many elements of growing
intelligence of which the unsociable animal is deprived.
Therefore we find, at the top of each class of animals, the ants,
the parrots, and the monkeys, all combining the greatest
sociability with the highest development of intelligence. The
fittest are thus the most sociable animals, and sociability
appears as the chief factor of evolution, both directly, by
securing the well-being of the species while diminishing the
waste of energy, and indirectly, by favouring the growth of
intelligence.

Moreover, it is evident that life in societies would be
utterly impossible without a corresponding development of social
feelings, and, especially, of a certain collective sense of
justice growing to become a habit. If every individual were
constantly abusing its personal advantages without the others
interfering in favour of the wronged, no society--life would be
possible. And feelings of justice develop, more or less, with all
gregarious animals. Whatever the distance from which the swallows
or the cranes come, each one returns to the nest it has built or
repaired last year. If a lazy sparrow intends appropriating the
nest which a comrade is building, or even steals from it a few
sprays of straw, the group interferes against the lazy comrade;
and it is evident that without such interference being the rule,
no nesting associations of birds could exist. Separate groups of
penguins have separate resting-places and separate fishing
abodes, and do not fight for them. The droves of cattle in
Australia have particular spots to which each group repairs to
rest, and from which it never deviates; and so on.(28) We have
any numbers of direct observations of the peace that prevails in
the nesting associations of birds, the villages of the rodents,
and the herds of grass-eaters; while, on the other side, we know
of few sociable animals which so continually quarrel as the rats
in our cellars do, or as the morses, which fight for the
possession of a sunny place on the shore. Sociability thus puts a
limit to physical struggle, and leaves room for the development
of better moral feelings. The high development of parental love
in all classes of animals, even with lions and tigers, is
generally known. As to the young birds and mammals whom we
continually see associating, sympathy--not love--attains a
further development in their associations. Leaving aside the
really touching facts of mutual attachment and compassion which
have been recorded as regards domesticated animals and with
animals kept in captivity, we have a number of well certified
facts of compassion between wild animals at liberty. Max Perty
and L. Buchner have given a number of such facts.(29) J.C.
Wood's narrative of a weasel which came to pick up and to carry
away an injured comrade enjoys a well-merited popularity.(30) So
also the observation of Captain Stansbury on his journey to Utah
which is quoted by Darwin; he saw a blind pelican which was fed,
and well fed, by other pelicans upon fishes which had to be
brought from a distance of thirty miles.(31) And when a herd of
vicunas was hotly pursued by hunters, H.A. Weddell saw more than
once during his journey to Bolivia and Peru, the strong males
covering the retreat of the herd and lagging behind in order to
protect the retreat. As to facts of compassion with wounded
comrades, they are continually mentioned by all field zoologists.
Such facts are quite natural. Compassion is a necessary outcome
of social life. But compassion also means a considerable advance
in general intelligence and sensibility. It is the first step
towards the development of higher moral sentiments. It is, in its
turn, a powerful factor of further evolution.

If the views developed on the preceding pages are correct,
the question necessarily arises, in how far are they consistent
with the theory of struggle for life as it has been developed by
Darwin, Wallace, and their followers? and I will now briefly
answer this important question. First of all, no naturalist will
doubt that the idea of a struggle for life carried on through
organic nature is the greatest generalization of our century.
Life is struggle; and in that struggle the fittest survive. But
the answers to the questions, "By which arms is this struggle
chiefly carried on?" and "Who are the fittest in the struggle?"
will widely differ according to the importance given to the two
different aspects of the struggle: the direct one, for food and
safety among separate individuals, and the struggle which Darwin
described as "metaphorical"--the struggle, very often
collective, against adverse circumstances. No one will deny that
there is, within each species, a certain amount of real
competition for food--at least, at certain periods. But the
question is, whether competition is carried on to the extent
admitted by Darwin, or even by Wallace; and whether this
competition has played, in the evolution of the animal kingdom,
the part assigned to it.

The idea which permeates Darwin's work is certainly one of
real competition going on within each animal group for food,
safety, and possibility of leaving an offspring. He often speaks
of regions being stocked with animal life to their full capacity,
and from that overstocking he infers the necessity of
competition. But when we look in his work for real proofs of that
competition, we must confess that we do not find them
sufficiently convincing. If we refer to the paragraph entitled
"Struggle for Life most severe between Individuals and Varieties
of the same Species," we find in it none of that wealth of proofs
and illustrations which we are accustomed to find in whatever
Darwin wrote. The struggle between individuals of the same
species is not illustrated under that heading by even one single
instance: it is taken as granted; and the competition between
closely-allied animal species is illustrated by but five
examples, out of which one, at least (relating to the two species
of thrushes), now proves to be doubtful.(32) But when we look
for more details in order to ascertain how far the decrease of
one species was really occasioned by the increase of the other
species, Darwin, with his usual fairness, tells us:

"We can dimly see why the competition should be most severe
between allied forms which fill nearly the same place in nature;
but probably in no case could we precisely say why one species
has been victorious over another in the great battle of life."

As to Wallace, who quotes the same facts under a
slightly-modified heading ("Struggle for Life between closely-allied
Animals and Plants often most severe"), he makes the following
remark (italics are mine), which gives quite another aspect to the
facts above quoted. He says:

"In some cases, no doubt, there is actual war between the
two, the stronger killing the weaker. but this is by no means
necessary, and there may be cases in which the weaker species,
physically, may prevail by its power of more rapid
multiplication, its better withstanding vicissitudes of climate,
or its greater cunning in escaping the attacks of common
enemies."

In such cases what is described as competition may be no
competition at all. One species succumbs, not because it is
exterminated or starved out by the other species, but because it
does not well accommodate itself to new conditions, which the
other does. The term "struggle for life" is again used in its
metaphorical sense, and may have no other. As to the real
competition between individuals of the same species, which is
illustrated in another place by the cattle of South America
during a period of drought, its value is impaired by its being
taken from among domesticated animals. Bisons emigrate in like
circumstances in order to avoid competition. However severe the
struggle between plants--and this is amply proved--we cannot
but repeat Wallace's remark to the effect that "plants live where
they can," while animals have, to a great extent, the power of
choice of their abode. So that we again are asking ourselves, To
what extent does competition really exist within each animal
species? Upon what is the assumption based? The same remark must
be made concerning the indirect argument in favour of a severe
competition and struggle for life within each species, which may
be derived from the "extermination of transitional varieties," so
often mentioned by Darwin. It is known that for a long time
Darwin was worried by the difficulty which he saw in the absence
of a long chain of intermediate forms between closely-allied
species, and that he found the solution of this difficulty in the
supposed extermination of the intermediate forms.(33) However,
an attentive reading of the different chapters in which Darwin
and Wallace speak of this subject soon brings one to the
conclusion that the word "extermination" does not mean real
extermination; the same remark which Darwin made concerning his
expression: "struggle for existence," evidently applies to the
word "extermination" as well. It can by no means be understood in
its direct sense, but must be taken "in its metaphoric sense." If
we start from the supposition that a given area is stocked with
animals to its fullest capacity, and that a keen competition for
the sheer means of existence is consequently going on between all
the inhabitants--each animal being compelled to fight against
all its congeners in order to get its daily food--then the
appearance of a new and successful variety would certainly mean
in many cases (though not always) the appearance of individuals
which are enabled to seize more than their fair share of the
means of existence; and the result would be that those
individuals would starve both the parental form which does not
possess the new variation and the intermediate forms which do not
possess it in the same degree. It may be that at the outset,
Darwin understood the appearance of new varieties under this
aspect; at least, the frequent use of the word "extermination"
conveys such an impression. But both he and Wallace knew Nature
too well not to perceive that this is by no means the only
possible and necessary course of affairs.

If the physical and the biological conditions of a given
area, the extension of the area occupied by a given species, and
the habits of all the members of the latter remained unchanged--
then the sudden appearance of a new variety might mean the
starving out and the extermination of all the individuals which
were not endowed in a sufficient degree with the new feature by
which the new variety is characterized. But such a combination of
conditions is precisely what we do not see in Nature. Each
species is continually tending to enlarge its abode; migration to
new abodes is the rule with the slow snail, as with the swift
bird; physical changes are continually going on in every given
area; and new varieties among animals consist in an immense
number of cases-perhaps in the majority--not in the growth of
new weapons for snatching the food from the mouth of its
congeners--food is only one out of a hundred of various
conditions of existence--but, as Wallace himself shows in a
charming paragraph on the "divergence of characters" (Darwinism,
p. 107), in forming new habits, moving to new abodes, and taking
to new sorts of food. In all such cases there will be no
extermination, even no competition--the new adaptation being a
relief from competition, if it ever existed; and yet there will
be, after a time, an absence of intermediate links, in
consequence of a mere survival of those which are best fitted for
the new conditions--as surely as under the hypothesis of
extermination of the parental form. It hardly need be added that
if we admit, with Spencer, all the Lamarckians, and Darwin
himself, the modifying influence of the surroundings upon the
species, there remains still less necessity for the extermination
of the intermediate forms.

The importance of migration and of the consequent isolation
of groups of animals, for the origin of new varieties and
ultimately of new species, which was indicated by Moritz Wagner,
was fully recognized by Darwin himself. Consequent researches
have only accentuated the importance of this factor, and they
have shown how the largeness of the area occupied by a given
species--which Darwin considered with full reason so important
for the appearance of new varieties--can be combined with the
isolation of parts of the species, in consequence of local
geological changes, or of local barriers. It would be impossible
to enter here into the discussion of this wide question, but a
few remarks will do to illustrate the combined action of these
agencies. It is known that portions of a given species will often
take to a new sort of food. The squirrels, for instance, when
there is a scarcity of cones in the larch forests, remove to the
fir-tree forests, and this change of food has certain well-known
physiological effects on the squirrels. If this change of habits
does not last--if next year the cones are again plentiful in
the dark larch woods--no new variety of squirrels will
evidently arise from this cause. But if part of the wide area
occupied by the squirrels begins to have its physical characters
altered--in consequence of, let us say, a milder climate or
desiccation, which both bring about an increase of the pine
forests in proportion to the larch woods--and if some other
conditions concur to induce the squirrels to dwell on the
outskirts of the desiccating region--we shall have then a new
variety, i.e. an incipient new species of squirrels, without
there having been anything that would deserve the name of
extermination among the squirrels. A larger proportion of
squirrels of the new, better adapted variety would survive every
year, and the intermediate links would die in the course of time,
without having been starved out by Malthusian competitors. This
is exactly what we see going on during the great physical changes
which are accomplished over large areas in Central Asia, owing to
the desiccation which is going on there since the glacial period.

To take another example, it has been proved by geologists
that the present wild horse (Equus Przewalski) has slowly been
evolved during the later parts of the Tertiary and the Quaternary
period, but that during this succession of ages its ancestors
were not confined to some given, limited area of the globe. They
wandered over both the Old and New World, returning, in all
probability, after a time to the pastures which they had, in the
course of their migrations, formerly left.(34) Consequently, if
we do not find now, in Asia, all the intermediate links between
the present wild horse and its Asiatic Post-Tertiary ancestors,
this does not mean at all that the intermediate links have been
exterminated. No such extermination has ever taken place. No
exceptional mortality may even have occurred among the ancestral
species: the individuals which belonged to intermediate varieties
and species have died in the usual course of events--often
amidst plentiful food, and their remains were buried all over the
globe.

In short, if we carefully consider this matter, and,
carefully re-read what Darwin himself wrote upon this subject, we
see that if the word "extermination" be used at all in connection
with transitional varieties, it must be used in its metaphoric
sense. As to "competition," this expression, too, is continually
used by Darwin (see, for instance, the paragraph "On Extinction")
as an image, or as a way-of-speaking, rather than with the
intention of conveying the idea of a real competition between two
portions of the same species for the means of existence. At any
rate, the absence of intermediate forms is no argument in favour
of it.

In reality, the chief argument in favour of a keen
competition for the means of existence continually going on
within every animal species is--to use Professor Geddes'
expression--the "arithmetical argument" borrowed from Malthus.

But this argument does not prove it at all. We might as well
take a number of villages in South-East Russia, the inhabitants
of which enjoy plenty of food, but have no sanitary accommodation
of any kind; and seeing that for the last eighty years the
birth-rate was sixty in the thousand, while the population is now
what it was eighty years ago, we might conclude that there has
been a terrible competition between the inhabitants. But the
truth is that from year to year the population remained
stationary, for the simple reason that one-third of the new-born
died before reaching their sixth month of life; one-half died
within the next four years, and out of each hundred born, only
seventeen or so reached the age of twenty. The new-comers went
away before having grown to be competitors. It is evident that if
such is the case with men, it is still more the case with
animals. In the feathered world the destruction of the eggs goes
on on such a tremendous scale that eggs are the chief food of
several species in the early summer; not to, say a word of the
storms, the inundations which destroy nests by the million in
America, and the sudden changes of weather which are fatal to the
young mammals. Each storm, each inundation, each visit of a rat
to a bird's nest, each sudden change of temperature, take away
those competitors which appear so terrible in theory.

As to the facts of an extremely rapid increase of horses and
cattle in America, of pigs and rabbits in New Zealand, and even
of wild animals imported from Europe (where their numbers are
kept down by man, not by competition), they rather seem opposed
to the theory of over-population. If horses and cattle could so
rapidly multiply in America, it simply proved that, however
numberless the buffaloes and other ruminants were at that time in
the New World, its grass-eating population was far below what the
prairies could maintain. If millions of intruders have found
plenty of food without starving out the former population of the
prairies, we must rather conclude that the Europeans found a want
of grass-eaters in America, not an excess. And we have good
reasons to believe that want of animal population is the natural
state of things all over the world, with but a few temporary
exceptions to the rule. The actual numbers of animals in a given
region are determined, not by the highest feeding capacity of the
region, but by what it is every year under the most unfavourable
conditions. So that, for that reason alone, competition hardly
can be a normal condition. but other causes intervene as well to
cut, down the animal population below even that low standard. If
we take the horses and cattle which are grazing all the winter
through in the Steppes of Transbaikalia, we find them very lean
and exhausted at the end of the winter. But they grow exhausted
not because there is not enough food for all of them--the grass
buried under a thin sheet of snow is everywhere in abundance--
but because of the difficulty of getting it from beneath the
snow, and this difficulty is the same for all horses alike.
Besides, days of glazed frost are common in early spring, and if
several such days come in succession the horses grow still more
exhausted. But then comes a snow-storm, which compels the already
weakened animals to remain without any food for several days, and
very great numbers of them die. The losses during the spring are
so severe that if the season has been more inclement than usual
they are even not repaired by the new breeds--the more so as
all horses are exhausted, and the young foals are born in a
weaker condition. The numbers of horses and cattle thus always
remain beneath what they otherwise might be; all the year round
there is food for five or ten times as many animals, and yet
their population increases extremely slowly. But as soon as the
Buriate owner makes ever so small a provision of hay in the
steppe, and throws it open during days of glazed frost, or
heavier snow-fall, he immediately sees the increase of his herd.
Almost all free grass-eating animals and many rodents in Asia and
America being in very much the same conditions, we can safely say
that their numbers are not kept down by competition; that at no
time of the year they can struggle for food, and that if they
never reach anything approaching to over-population, the cause is
in the climate, not in competition.

The importance of natural checks to over-multiplication, and
especially their bearing upon the competition hypothesis, seems
never to have been taken into due account The checks, or rather
some of them, are mentioned, but their action is seldom studied
in detail. However, if we compare the action of the natural
checks with that of competition, we must recognize at once that
the latter sustains no comparison whatever with the other checks.
Thus, Mr. Bates mentions the really astounding numbers of winged
ants which are destroyed during their exodus. The dead or
half-dead bodies of the formica de fuego (Myrmica saevissima)
which had been blown into the river during a gale "were heaped in
a line an inch or two in height and breadth, the line continuing
without interruption for miles at the edge of the water."(35)
Myriads of ants are thus destroyed amidst a nature which might
support a hundred times as many ants as are actually living. Dr.
Altum, a German forester, who wrote a very interesting book about
animals injurious to our forests, also gives many facts showing
the immense importance of natural checks. He says, that a
succession of gales or cold and damp weather during the exodus of
the pine-moth (Bombyx pini) destroy it to incredible amounts, and
during the spring of 1871 all these moths disappeared at once,
probably killed by a succession of cold nights.(36) Many like
examples relative to various insects could be quoted from various
parts of Europe. Dr. Altum also mentions the bird-enemies of the
pine-moth, and the immense amount of its eggs destroyed by foxes;
but he adds that the parasitic fungi which periodically infest it
are a far more terrible enemy than any bird, because they destroy
the moth over very large areas at once. As to various species of
mice (Mus sylvaticus, Arvicola arvalis, and A. agrestis), the
same author gives a long list of their enemies, but he remarks:
"However, the most terrible enemies of mice are not other
animals, but such sudden changes of weather as occur almost every
year." Alternations of frost and warm weather destroy them in
numberless quantities; "one single sudden change can reduce
thousands of mice to the number of a few individuals." On the
other side, a warm winter, or a winter which gradually steps in,
make them multiply in menacing proportions, notwithstanding every
enemy; such was the case in 1876 and 1877.(37) Competition, in
the case of mice, thus appears a quite trifling factor when
compared with weather. Other facts to the same effect are also
given as regards squirrels.

As to birds, it is well known how they suffer from sudden
changes of weather. Late snow-storms are as destructive of
bird-life on the English moors, as they are in Siberia; and Ch.
Dixon saw the red grouse so pressed during some exceptionally
severe winters, that they quitted the moors in numbers, "and we
have then known them actually to be taken in the streets of
Sheffield. Persistent wet," he adds, "is almost as fatal to
them."

On the other side, the contagious diseases which continually
visit most animal species destroy them in such numbers that the
losses often cannot be repaired for many years, even with the
most rapidly-multiply ing animals. Thus, some sixty years ago,
the sousliks suddenly disappeared in the neighbourhood of
Sarepta, in South-Eastern Russia, in consequence of some
epidemics; and for years no sousliks were seen in that
neighbourhood. It took many years before they became as numerous
as they formerly were.(38)

Like facts, all tending to reduce the importance given to
competition, could be produced in numbers. Of course, it might
be replied, in Darwin's words, that nevertheless each organic being
"at some period of its life, during some season of the year, during
each generation or at intervals, has to struggle for life and to
suffer great destruction," and that the fittest survive during such
periods of hard struggle for life. But if the evolution of the
animal world were based exclusively, or even chiefly, upon the
survival of the fittest during periods of calamities; if natural
selection were limited in its action to periods of exceptional
drought, or sudden changes of temperature, or inundations,
retrogression would be the rule in the animal world. Those who
survive a famine, or a severe epidemic of cholera, or small-pox, or
diphtheria, such as we see them in uncivilized countries, are
neither the strongest, nor the healthiest, nor the most intelligent.
No progress could be based on those survivals--the less so as all
survivors usually come out of the ordeal with an impaired health,
like the Transbaikalian horses just mentioned, or the Arctic crews,
or the garrison of a fortress which has been compelled to live for a
few months on half rations, and comes out of its experience with a
broken health, and subsequently shows a quite abnormal mortality.
All that natural selection can do in times of calamities is to spare
the individuals endowed with the greatest endurance for privations
of all kinds. So it does among the Siberian horses and cattle. They
are enduring; they can feed upon the Polar birch in case of need;
they resist cold and hunger. But no Siberian horse is capable of
carrying half the weight which a European horse carries with ease;
no Siberian cow gives half the amount of milk given by a Jersey cow,
and no natives of uncivilized countries can bear a comparison with
Europeans. They may better endure hunger and cold, but their
physical force is very far below that of a well-fed European, and
their intellectual progress is despairingly slow. "Evil cannot be
productive of good," as Tchernyshevsky wrote in a remarkable essay
upon Darwinism.(39)

Happily enough, competition is not the rule either in the
animal world or in mankind. It is limited among animals to
exceptional periods, and natural selection finds better fields
for its activity. Better conditions are created by the
elimination of competition by means of mutual aid and mutual
Support.(40) In the great struggle for life--for the greatest
possible fulness and intensity of life with the least waste of
energy--natural selection continually seeks out the ways
precisely for avoiding competition as much as possible. The ants
combine in nests and nations; they pile up their stores, they
rear their cattle--and thus avoid competition; and natural
selection picks out of the ants' family the species which know
best how to avoid competition, with its unavoidably deleterious
consequences. Most of our birds slowly move southwards as the
winter comes, or gather in numberless societies and undertake
long journeys--and thus avoid competition. Many rodents fall
asleep when the time comes that competition should set in; while
other rodents store food for the winter, and gather in large
villages for obtaining the necessary protection when at work. The
reindeer, when the lichens are dry in the interior of the
continent, migrate towards the sea. Buffaloes cross an immense
continent in order to find plenty of food. And the beavers, when
they grow numerous on a river, divide into two parties, and go,
the old ones down the river, and the young ones up the river and
avoid competition. And when animals can neither fall asleep, nor
migrate, nor lay in stores, nor themselves grow their food like
the ants, they do what the titmouse does, and what Wallace
(Darwinism, ch. v) has so charmingly described: they resort to
new kinds of food--and thus, again, avoid competition.

"Don't compete!--competition is always injurious to the
species, and you have plenty of resources to avoid it!" That is
the tendency of nature, not always realized in full, but always
present. That is the watchword which comes to us from the bush,
the forest, the river, the ocean. "Therefore combine--practise
mutual aid! That is the surest means for giving to each and to
all the greatest safety, the best guarantee of existence and
progress, bodily, intellectual, and moral." That is what Nature
teaches us; and that is what all those animals which have
attained the highest position in their respective classes have
done. That is also what man--the most primitive man--has been
doing; and that is why man has reached the position upon which we
stand now, as we shall see in the subsequent chapters devoted to
mutual aid in human societies.

NOTES:

1. Syevettsoff's Periodical Phenomena, p. 251.

2. Seyfferlitz, quoted by Brehm, iv. 760.

3. The Arctic Voyages of A.E. Nordenskjold, London, 1879, p. 135.
See also the powerful description of the St. Kilda islands by Mr.
Dixon (quoted by Seebohm), and nearly all books of Arctic travel.

4. Elliot Coues, in Bulletin U.S. Geol. Survey of Territories,
iv. No. 7, pp. 556, 579, etc. Among the gulls (Larus argentatus),
Polyakoff saw on a marsh in Northern Russia, that the nesting
grounds of a very great number of these birds were always
patrolled by one male, which warned the colony of the approach of
danger. All birds rose in such case and attacked the enemy with
great vigour. The females, which had five or six nests together
On each knoll of the marsh, kept a certain order in leaving their
nests in search of food. The fledglings, which otherwise are
extremely unprotected and easily become the prey of the rapacious
birds, were never left alone ("Family Habits among the Aquatic
Birds," in Proceedings of the Zool. Section of St. Petersburg
Soc. of Nat., Dec. 17, 1874).

5. Brehm Father, quoted by A. Brehm, iv. 34 seq. See also White's
Natural History of Selborne, Letter XI.

6. Dr. Coues, Birds of Dakota and Montana, in Bulletin U.S.
Survey of Territories, iv. No. 7.

7. It has often been intimated that larger birds may occasionally
transport some of the smaller birds when they cross together the
Mediterranean, but the fact still remains doubtful. On the other
side, it is certain that some smaller birds join the bigger ones
for migration. The fact has been noticed several times, and it
was recently confirmed by L. Buxbaum at Raunheim. He saw several
parties of cranes which had larks flying in the midst and on both
sides of their migratory columns (Der zoologische Garten, 1886,
p. 133).

8. H. Seebohm and Ch. Dixon both mention this habit.

9. The fact is well known to every field-naturalist, and with
reference to England several examples may be found in Charles
Dixon's Among the Birds in Northern Shires. The chaffinches
arrive during winter in vast flocks; and about the same time,
i.e. in November, come flocks of bramblings; redwings also
frequent the same places "in similar large companies," and so on
(pp. 165, 166).

10. S.W. Baker, Wild Beasts, etc., vol. i. p. 316.

11. Tschudi, Thierleben der Alpenwelt, p. 404.

12. Houzeau's Etudes, ii. 463.

13. For their hunting associations see Sir E. Tennant's Natural
History of Ceylon, quoted in Romanes's Animal Intelligence, p.
432.

14. See Emil Huter's letter in L. Buchner's Liebe.

15. With regard to the viscacha it is very interesting to note
that these highly-sociable little animals not only live peaceably
together in each village, but that whole villages visit each
other at nights. Sociability is thus extended to the whole
species--not only to a given society, or to a nation, as we saw
it with the ants. When the farmer destroys a viscacha-burrow, and
buries the inhabitants under a heap of earth, other viscachas--
we are told by Hudson--"come from a distance to dig out those
that are buried alive" (l.c., p. 311). This is a widely-known
fact in La Plata, verified by the author.

16. Handbuch fur Juger und Jagdberechtigte, quoted by Brehm, ii.
223.

17. Buffon's Histoire Naturelle.

18. In connection with the horses it is worthy of notice that the
quagga zebra, which never comes together with the dauw zebra,
nevertheless lives on excellent terms, not only with ostriches,
which are very good sentries, but also with gazelles, several
species of antelopes, and gnus. We thus have a case of mutual
dislike between the quagga and the dauw which cannot be explained
by competition for food. The fact that the quagga lives together
with ruminants feeding on the same grass as itself excludes that
hypothesis, and we must look for some incompatibility of
character, as in the case of the hare and the rabbit. Cf., among
others, Clive Phillips-Wolley's Big Game Shooting (Badminton
Library), which contains excellent illustrations of various
species living together in East Africa.

19. Our Tungus hunter, who was going to marry, and therefore was
prompted by the desire of getting as many furs as he possibly
could, was beating the hill-sides all day long on horseback in
search of deer. His efforts were not rewarded by even so much as
one fallow deer killed every day; and he was an excellent hunter.

20. According to Samuel W. Baker, elephants combine in larger
groups than the "compound family." "I have frequently observed,"
he wrote, "in the portion of Ceylon known as the Park Country,
the tracks of elephants in great numbers which have evidently
been considerable herds that have joined together in a general
retreat from a ground which they considered insecure" (Wild
Beasts and their Ways, vol. i. p. 102).

21. Pigs, attacked by wolves, do the same (Hudson, l.c.).

22. Romanes's Animal Intelligence, p. 472.

23. Brehm, i. 82; Darwin's Descent of Man, ch. iii. The Kozloff
expedition of 1899-1901 have also had to sustain in Northern
Thibet a similar fight.

24. The more strange was it to read in the previously-mentioned
article by Huxley the following paraphrase of a well-known
sentence of Rousseau: "The first men who substituted mutual peace
for that of mutual war--whatever the motive which impelled them
to take that step--created society" (Nineteenth Century, Feb.
1888, p. 165). Society has not been created by man; it is
anterior to man.

25. Such monographs as the chapter on "Music and Dancing in
Nature" which we have in Hudson's Naturalist on the La Plata, and
Carl Gross' Play of Animals, have already thrown a considerable
light upon an instinct which is absolutely universal in Nature.

26. Not only numerous species of birds possess the habit of
assembling together--in many cases always at the same spot--
to indulge in antics and dancing performances, but W.H. Hudson's
experience is that nearly all mammals and birds ("probably there
are really no exceptions") indulge frequently in more or less
regular or set performances with or without sound, or composed of
sound exclusively (p. 264).

27. For the choruses of monkeys, see Brehm.

28. Haygarth, Bush Life in Australia, p. 58.

29. To quote but a few instances, a wounded badger was carried
away by another badger suddenly appearing on the scene; rats have
been seen feeding a blind couple (Seelenleben der Thiere, p. 64
seq.). Brehm himself saw two crows feeding in a hollow tree a
third crow which was wounded; its wound was several weeks old
(Hausfreund, 1874, 715; Buchner's Liebe, 203). Mr. Blyth saw
Indian crows feeding two or three blind comrades; and so on.

30. Man and Beast, p. 344.

31. L.H. Morgan, The American Beaver, 1868, p. 272; Descent of
Man, ch. iv.

32. One species of swallow is said to have caused the decrease of
another swallow species in North America; the recent increase of
the missel-thrush in Scotland has caused the decrease of the
song-thrush; the brown rat has taken the place of the black rat
in Europe; in Russia the small cockroach has everywhere driven
before it its greater congener; and in Australia the imported
hive-bee is rapidly exterminating the small stingless bee. Two
other cases, but relative to domesticated animals, are mentioned
in the preceding paragraph. While recalling these same facts,
A.R. Wallace remarks in a footnote relative to the Scottish
thrushes: "Prof. A. Newton, however, informs me that these
species do not interfere in the way here stated" (Darwinism, p.
34). As to the brown rat, it is known that, owing to its
amphibian habits, it usually stays in the lower parts of human
dwellings (low cellars, sewers, etc.), as also on the banks of
canals and rivers; it also undertakes distant migrations in
numberless bands. The black rat, on the contrary, prefers staying
in our dwellings themselves, under the floor, as well as in our
stables and barns. It thus is much more exposed to be
exterminated by man; and we cannot maintain, with any approach to
certainty, that the black rat is being either exterminated or
starved out by the brown rat and not by man.

33. "But it may be urged that when several closely-allied species
inhabit the same territory, we surely ought to find at the
present time many transitional forms.... By my theory these
allied species are descended from a common parent; and during the
process of modification, each has become adapted to the
conditions of life of its own region, and has supplanted and
exterminated its original parent-form and all the transitional
varieties between its past and present states" (Origin of
Species, 6th ed. p. 134); also p. 137, 296 (all paragraph "On
Extinction").

34. According to Madame Marie Pavloff, who has made a special
study of this subject, they migrated from Asia to Africa, stayed
there some time, and returned next to Asia. Whether this double
migration be confirmed or not, the fact of a former extension of
the ancestor of our horse over Asia, Africa, and America is
settled beyond doubt.

35. The Naturalist on the River Amazons, ii. 85, 95.

36. Dr. B. Altum, Waldbeschadigungen durch Thiere und Gegenmittel
(Berlin, 1889), pp. 207 seq.

37. Dr. B. Altum, ut supra, pp. 13 and 187.

38. A. Becker in the Bulletin de la Societe des Naturalistes de
Moscou, 1889, p. 625.

39. Russkaya Mysl, Sept. 1888: "The Theory of Beneficency of
Struggle for Life, being a Preface to various Treatises on
Botanics, Zoology, and Human Life," by an Old Transformist.

40. "One of the most frequent modes in which Natural Selection
acts is, by adapting some individuals of a species to a somewhat
different mode of life, whereby they are able to seize
unappropriated places in Nature" (Origin of Species, p. 145)--
in other words, to avoid competition.






CHAPTER III

MUTUAL AID AMONG SAVAGES

Supposed war of each against all. Tribal origin of human
society. Late appearance of the separate family. Bushmen
and Hottentots. Australians, Papuas. Eskimos, Aleoutes. 
Features of savage life difficult to understand for the European. 
The Dayak's conception of justice. Common law.





The immense part played by mutual aid and mutual support in
the evolution of the animal world has been briefly analyzed in
the preceding chapters. We have now to cast a glance upon the
part played by the same agencies in the evolution of mankind. We
saw how few are the animal species which live an isolated life,
and how numberless are those which live in societies, either for
mutual defence, or for hunting and storing up food, or for
rearing their offspring, or simply for enjoying life in common.
We also saw that, though a good deal of warfare goes on between
different classes of animals, or different species, or even
different tribes of the same species, peace and mutual support
are the rule within the tribe or the species; and that those
species which best know how to combine, and to avoid competition,
have the best chances of survival and of a further progressive
development. They prosper, while the unsociable species decay.

It is evident that it would be quite contrary to all that we
know of nature if men were an exception to so general a rule: if
a creature so defenceless as man was at his beginnings should
have found his protection and his way to progress, not in mutual
support, like other animals, but in a reckless competition for
personal advantages, with no regard to the interests of the
species. To a mind accustomed to the idea of unity in nature,
such a proposition appears utterly indefensible. And yet,
improbable and unphilosophical as it is, it has never found a
lack of supporters. There always were writers who took a
pessimistic view of mankind. They knew it, more or less
superficially, through their own limited experience; they knew of
history what the annalists, always watchful of wars, cruelty, and
oppression, told of it, and little more besides; and they
concluded that mankind is nothing but a loose aggregation of
beings, always ready to fight with each other, and only prevented
from so doing by the intervention of some authority.

Hobbes took that position; and while some of his
eighteenth-century followers endeavoured to prove that at no
epoch of its existence--not even in its most primitive
condition--mankind lived in a state of perpetual warfare; that
men have been sociable even in "the state of nature," and that
want of knowledge, rather than the natural bad inclinations of
man, brought humanity to all the horrors of its early historical
life,--his idea was, on the contrary, that the so-called "state
of nature" was nothing but a permanent fight between individuals,
accidentally huddled together by the mere caprice of their
bestial existence. True, that science has made some progress
since Hobbes's time, and that we have safer ground to stand upon
than the speculations of Hobbes or Rousseau. But the Hobbesian
philosophy has plenty of admirers still; and we have had of late
quite a school of writers who, taking possession of Darwin's
terminology rather than of his leading ideas, made of it an
argument in favour of Hobbes's views upon primitive man, and even
succeeded in giving them a scientific appearance. Huxley, as is
known, took the lead of that school, and in a paper written in
1888 he represented primitive men as a sort of tigers or lions,
deprived of all ethical conceptions, fighting out the struggle
for existence to its bitter end, and living a life of "continual
free fight"; to quote his own words--"beyond the limited and,
temporary relations of the family, the Hobbesian war of each
against all was the normal state of existence."(1)

It has been remarked more than once that the chief error of
Hobbes, and the eighteenth-century philosophers as well, was to
imagine that mankind began its life in the shape of small
straggling families, something like the "limited and temporary"
families of the bigger carnivores, while in reality it is now
positively known that such was not the case. Of course, we have
no direct evidence as to the modes of life of the first man-like
beings. We are not yet settled even as to the time of their first
appearance, geologists being inclined at present to see their
traces in the pliocene, or even the miocene, deposits of the
Tertiary period. But we have the indirect method which permits us
to throw some light even upon that remote antiquity. A most
careful investigation into the social institutions of the lowest
races has been carried on during the last forty years, and it has
revealed among the present institutions of primitive folk some
traces of still older institutions which have long disappeared,
but nevertheless left unmistakable traces of their previous
existence. A whole science devoted to the embryology of human
institutions has thus developed in the hands of Bachofen,
MacLennan, Morgan, Edwin Tylor, Maine, Post, Kovalevsky, Lubbock,
and many others. And that science has established beyond any
doubt that mankind did not begin its life in the shape of small
isolated families.

Far from being a primitive form of organization, the family
is a very late product of human evolution. As far as we can go
back in the palaeo-ethnology of mankind, we find men living in
societies--in tribes similar to those of the highest mammals;
and an extremely slow and long evolution was required to bring
these societies to the gentile, or clan organization, which, in
its turn, had to undergo another, also very long evolution,
before the first germs of family, polygamous or monogamous, could
appear. Societies, bands, or tribes--not families--were thus
the primitive form of organization of mankind and its earliest
ancestors. That is what ethnology has come to after its
painstaking researches. And in so doing it simply came to what
might have been foreseen by the zoologist. None of the higher
mammals, save a few carnivores and a few undoubtedly-decaying
species of apes (orang-outans and gorillas), live in small
families, isolatedly straggling in the woods. All others live in
societies. And Darwin so well understood that isolately-living
apes never could have developed into man-like beings, that he was
inclined to consider man as descended from some comparatively
weak but social species, like the chimpanzee, rather than from
some stronger but unsociable species, like the gorilla.(2)
Zoology and palaeo-ethnology are thus agreed in considering that
the band, not the family, was the earliest form of social life.
The first human societies simply were a further development of
those societies which constitute the very essence of life of the
higher animals.(3)

If we now go over to positive evidence, we see that the
earliest traces of man, dating from the glacial or the early
post-glacial period, afford unmistakable proofs of man having
lived even then in societies. Isolated finds of stone implements,
even from the old stone age, are very rare; on the contrary,
wherever one flint implement is discovered others are sure to be
found, in most cases in very large quantities. At a time when men
were dwelling in caves, or under occasionally protruding rocks,
in company with mammals now extinct, and hardly succeeded in
making the roughest sorts of flint hatchets, they already knew
the advantages of life in societies. In the valleys of the
tributaries of the Dordogne, the surface of the rocks is in some
places entirely covered with caves which were inhabited by
palaeolithic men.(4) Sometimes the cave-dwellings are superposed
in storeys, and they certainly recall much more the nesting
colonies of swallows than the dens of carnivores. As to the flint
implements discovered in those caves, to use Lubbock's words,
"one may say without exaggeration that they are numberless." The
same is true of other palaeolithic stations. It also appears from
Lartet's investigations that the inhabitants of the Aurignac
region in the south of France partook of tribal meals at the
burial of their dead. So that men lived in societies, and had
germs of a tribal worship, even at that extremely remote epoch.

The same is still better proved as regards the later part of
the stone age. Traces of neolithic man have been found in
numberless quantities, so that we can reconstitute his manner of
life to a great extent. When the ice-cap (which must have spread
from the Polar regions as far south as middle France, middle
Germany, and middle Russia, and covered Canada as well as a good
deal of what is now the United States) began to melt away, the
surfaces freed from ice were covered, first, with swamps and
marshes, and later on with numberless lakes.(5) Lakes filled all
depressions of the valleys before their waters dug out those
permanent channels which, during a subsequent epoch, became our
rivers. And wherever we explore, in Europe, Asia, or America, the
shores of the literally numberless lakes of that period, whose
proper name would be the Lacustrine period, we find traces of
neolithic man. They are so numerous that we can only wonder at
the relative density of population at that time. The "stations"
of neolithic man closely follow each other on the terraces which
now mark the shores of the old lakes. And at each of those
stations stone implements appear in such numbers, that no doubt
is possible as to the length of time during which they were
inhabited by rather numerous tribes. Whole workshops of flint
implements, testifying of the numbers of workers who used to come
together, have been discovered by the archaeologists.

Traces of a more advanced period, already characterized by
the use of some pottery, are found in the shell-heaps of Denmark.
They appear, as is well known, in the shape of heaps from five to
ten feet thick, from 100 to 200 feet wide, and 1,000 feet or more
in length, and they are so common along some parts of the
sea-coast that for a long time they were considered as natural
growths. And yet they "contain nothing but what has been in some
way or other subservient to the use of man," and they are so
densely stuffed with products of human industry that, during a
two days' stay at Milgaard, Lubbock dug out no less than 191
pieces of stone-implements and four fragments of pottery.(6) The
very size and extension of the shell heaps prove that for
generations and generations the coasts of Denmark were inhabited
by hundreds of small tribes which certainly lived as peacefully
together as the Fuegian tribes, which also accumulate like
shellheaps, are living in our own times.

As to the lake-dwellings of Switzerland, which represent a
still further advance in civilization, they yield still better
evidence of life and work in societies. It is known that even
during the stone age the shores of the Swiss lakes were dotted
with a succession of villages, each of which consisted of several
huts, and was built upon a platform supported by numberless
pillars in the lake. No less than twenty-four, mostly stone age
villages, were discovered along the shores of Lake Leman,
thirty-two in the Lake of Constance, forty-six in the Lake of
Neuchatel, and so on; and each of them testifies to the immense
amount of labour which was spent in common by the tribe, not by
the family. It has even been asserted that the life of the
lake-dwellers must have been remarkably free of warfare. And so
it probably was, especially if we refer to the life of those
primitive folk who live until the present time in similar
villages built upon pillars on the sea coasts.

It is thus seen, even from the above rapid hints, that our
knowledge of primitive man is not so scanty after all, and that,
so far as it goes, it is rather opposed than favourable to the
Hobbesian speculations. Moreover, it may be supplemented, to a
great extent, by the direct observation of such primitive tribes
as now stand on the same level of civilization as the inhabitants
of Europe stood in prehistoric times.

That these primitive tribes which we find now are not
degenerated specimens of mankind who formerly knew a higher
civilization, as it has occasionally been maintained, has
sufficiently been proved by Edwin Tylor and Lubbock. However, to
the arguments already opposed to the degeneration theory, the
following may be added. Save a few tribes clustering in the
less-accessible highlands, the "savages" represent a girdle which
encircles the more or less civilized nations, and they occupy the
extremities of our continents, most of which have retained still,
or recently were bearing, an early post-glacial character. Such
are the Eskimos and their congeners in Greenland, Arctic America,
and Northern Siberia; and, in the Southern hemisphere, the
Australians, the Papuas, the Fuegians, and, partly, the Bushmen;
while within the civilized area, like primitive folk are only
found in the Himalayas, the highlands of Australasia, and the
plateaus of Brazil. Now it must be borne in mind that the glacial
age did not come to an end at once over the whole surface of the
earth. It still continues in Greenland. Therefore, at a time when
the littoral regions of the Indian Ocean, the Mediterranean, or
the Gulf of Mexico already enjoyed a warmer climate, and became
the seats of higher civilizations, immense territories in middle
Europe, Siberia, and Northern America, as well as in Patagonia,
Southern Africa, and Southern Australasia, remained in early
postglacial conditions which rendered them inaccessible to the
civilized nations of the torrid and sub-torrid zones. They were
at that time what the terrible urmans of North-West Siberia are
now, and their population, inaccessible to and untouched by
civilization, retained the characters of early post-glacial man.
Later on, when desiccation rendered these territories more
suitable for agriculture, they were peopled with more civilized
immigrants; and while part of their previous inhabitants were
assimilated by the new settlers, another part migrated further,
and settled where we find them. The territories they inhabit now
are still, or recently were, sub-glacial, as to their physical
features; their arts and implements are those of the neolithic
age; and, notwithstanding their racial differences, and the
distances which separate them, their modes of life and social
institutions bear a striking likeness. So we cannot but consider
them as fragments of the early post-glacial population of the now
civilized area.

The first thing which strikes us as soon as we begin studying
primitive folk is the complexity of the organization of marriage
relations under which they are living. With most of them the
family, in the sense we attribute to it, is hardly found in its
germs. But they are by no means loose aggregations of men and
women coming in a disorderly manner together in conformity with
their momentary caprices. All of them are under a certain
organization, which has been described by Morgan in its general
aspects as the "gentile," or clan organization.(7)

To tell the matter as briefly as possible, there is little
doubt that mankind has passed at its beginnings through a stage
which may be described as that of "communal marriage"; that is,
the whole tribe had husbands and wives in common with but little
regard to consanguinity. But it is also certain that some
restrictions to that free intercourse were imposed at a very
early period. Inter-marriage was soon prohibited between the sons
of one mother and her sisters, granddaughters, and aunts. Later
on it was prohibited between the sons and daughters of the same
mother, and further limitations did not fail to follow. The idea
of a gens, or clan, which embodied all presumed descendants from
one stock (or rather all those who gathered in one group) was
evolved, and marriage within the clan was entirely prohibited. It
still remained "communal," but the wife or the husband had to be
taken from another clan. And when a gens became too numerous, and
subdivided into several gentes, each of them was divided into
classes (usually four), and marriage was permitted only between
certain well-defined classes. That is the stage which we find now
among the Kamilaroi-speaking Australians. As to the family, its
first germs appeared amidst the clan organization. A woman who
was captured in war from some other clan, and who formerly would
have belonged to the whole gens, could be kept at a later period
by the capturer, under certain obligations towards the tribe. She
may be taken by him to a separate hut, after she had paid a
certain tribute to the clan, and thus constitute within the gens
a separate family, the appearance of which evidently was opening
a quite new phase of civilization.

Now, if we take into consideration that this complicated
organization developed among men who stood at the lowest known
degree of development, and that it maintained itself in societies
knowing no kind of authority besides the authority of public
opinion, we at once see how deeply inrooted social instincts must
have been in human nature, even at its lowest stages. A savage
who is capable of living under such an organization, and of
freely submitting to rules which continually clash with his
personal desires, certainly is not a beast devoid of ethical
principles and knowing no rein to its passions. But the fact
becomes still more striking if we consider the immense antiquity
of the clan organization. It is now known that the primitive
Semites, the Greeks of Homer, the prehistoric Romans, the Germans
of Tacitus, the early Celts and the early Slavonians, all have
had their own period of clan organization, closely analogous to
that of the Australians, the Red Indians, the Eskimos, and other
inhabitants of the "savage girdle."(9) So we must admit that
either the evolution of marriage laws went on on the same lines
among all human races, or the rudiments of the clan rules were
developed among some common ancestors of the Semites, the Aryans,
the Polynesians, etc., before their differentiation into separate
races took place, and that these rules were maintained, until
now, among races long ago separated from the common stock. Both
alternatives imply, however, an equally striking tenacity of the
institution--such a tenacity that no assaults of the individual
could break it down through the scores of thousands of years that
it was in existence. The very persistence of the clan
organization shows how utterly false it is to represent primitive
mankind as a disorderly agglomeration of individuals, who only
obey their individual passions, and take advantage of their
personal force and cunningness against all other representatives
of the species. Unbridled individualism is a modern growth, but
it is not characteristic of primitive mankind.(10)

Going now over to the existing savages, we may begin with the
Bushmen, who stand at a very low level of development--so low
indeed that they have no dwellings and sleep in holes dug in the
soil, occasionally protected by some screens. It is known that
when Europeans settled in their territory and destroyed deer, the
Bushmen began stealing the settlers' cattle, whereupon a war of
extermination, too horrible to be related here, was waged against
them. Five hundred Bushmen were slaughtered in 1774, three
thousand in 1808 and 1809 by the Farmers' Alliance, and so on.
They were poisoned like rats, killed by hunters lying in ambush
before the carcass of some animal, killed wherever met with.(11)
So that our knowledge of the Bushmen, being chiefly borrowed from
those same people who exterminated them, is necessarily limited.
But still we know that when the Europeans came, the Bushmen lived
in small tribes (or clans), sometimes federated together; that
they used to hunt in common, and divided the spoil without
quarrelling; that they never abandoned their wounded, and
displayed strong affection to their comrades. Lichtenstein has a
most touching story about a Bushman, nearly drowned in a river,
who was rescued by his companions. They took off their furs to
cover him, and shivered themselves; they dried him, rubbed him
before the fire, and smeared his body with warm grease till they
brought him back to life. And when the Bushmen found, in Johan
van der Walt, a man who treated them well, they expressed their
thankfulness by a most touching attachment to that man.(12)
Burchell and Moffat both represent them as goodhearted,
disinterested, true to their promises, and grateful,(13) all
qualities which could develop only by being practised within the
tribe. As to their love to children, it is sufficient to say that
when a European wished to secure a Bushman woman as a slave, he
stole her child: the mother was sure to come into slavery to
share the fate of her child.(14)

The same social manners characterize the Hottentots, who are
but a little more developed than the Bushmen. Lubbock describes
them as "the filthiest animals," and filthy they really are. A
fur suspended to the neck and worn till it falls to pieces is all
their dress; their huts are a few sticks assembled together and
covered with mats, with no kind of furniture within. And though
they kept oxen and sheep, and seem to have known the use of iron
before they made acquaintance with the Europeans, they still
occupy one of the lowest degrees of the human scale. And yet
those who knew them highly praised their sociability and
readiness to aid each other. If anything is given to a Hottentot,
he at once divides it among all present--a habit which, as is
known, so much struck Darwin among the Fuegians. He cannot eat
alone, and, however hungry, he calls those who pass by to share
his food. And when Kolben expressed his astonishment thereat, he
received the answer. "That is Hottentot manner." But this is not
Hottentot manner only: it is an all but universal habit among the
"savages." Kolben, who knew the Hottentots well and did not pass
by their defects in silence, could not praise their tribal
morality highly enough.

"Their word is sacred," he wrote. They know "nothing of the
corruptness and faithless arts of Europe." "They live in great
tranquillity and are seldom at war with their neighbours." They
are "all kindness and goodwill to one another.. One of the
greatest pleasures of the Hottentots certainly lies in their
gifts and good offices to one another." "The integrity of the
Hottentots, their strictness and celerity in the exercise of
justice, and their chastity, are things in which they excel all
or most nations in the world."(15)

Tachart, Barrow, and Moodie(16) fully confirm Kolben's
testimony. Let me only remark that when Kolben wrote that "they
are certainly the most friendly, the most liberal and the most
benevolent people to one another that ever appeared on the earth"
(i. 332), he wrote a sentence which has continually appeared
since in the description of savages. When first meeting with
primitive races, the Europeans usually make a caricature of their
life; but when an intelligent man has stayed among them for a
longer time, he generally describes them as the "kindest" or "the
gentlest" race on the earth. These very same words have been
applied to the Ostyaks, the Samoyedes, the Eskimos, the Dayaks,
the Aleoutes, the Papuas, and so on, by the highest authorities.
I also remember having read them applied to the Tunguses, the
Tchuktchis, the Sioux, and several others. The very frequency of
that high commendation already speaks volumes in itself.

The natives of Australia do not stand on a higher level of
development than their South African brothers. Their huts are of
the same character. very often simple screens are the only
protection against cold winds. In their food they are most
indifferent: they devour horribly putrefied corpses, and
cannibalism is resorted to in times of scarcity. When first
discovered by Europeans, they had no implements but in stone or
bone, and these were of the roughest description. Some tribes had
even no canoes, and did not know barter-trade. And yet, when
their manners and customs were carefully studied, they proved to
be living under that elaborate clan organization which I have
mentioned on a preceding page.(17)

The territory they inhabit is usually allotted between the
different gentes or clans; but the hunting and fishing
territories of each clan are kept in common, and the produce of
fishing and hunting belongs to the whole clan; so also the
fishing and hunting implements.(18) The meals are taken in
common. Like many other savages, they respect certain regulations
as to the seasons when certain gums and grasses may be
collected.(19) As to their morality altogether, we cannot do
better than transcribe the following answers given to the
questions of the Paris Anthropological Society by Lumholtz, a
missionary who sojourned in North Queensland:(20)--

"The feeling of friendship is known among them; it is strong.
Weak people are usually supported; sick people are very well
attended to; they never are abandoned or killed. These tribes are
cannibals, but they very seldom eat members of their own tribe
(when immolated on religious principles, I suppose); they eat
strangers only. The parents love their children, play with them,
and pet them. Infanticide meets with common approval. Old people
are very well treated, never put to death. No religion, no idols,
only a fear of death. Polygamous marriage. quarrels arising
within the tribe are settled by means of duels fought with wooden
swords and shields. No slaves; no culture of any kind; no
pottery; no dress, save an apron sometimes worn by women. The
clan consists of two hundred individuals, divided into four
classes of men and four of women; marriage being only permitted
within the usual classes, and never within the gens."

For the Papuas, closely akin to the above, we have the
testimony of G.L. Bink, who stayed in New Guinea, chiefly in
Geelwink Bay, from 1871 to 1883. Here is the essence of his
answers to the same questioner:(21)--

"They are sociable and cheerful; they laugh very much. Rather
timid than courageous. Friendship is relatively strong among
persons belonging to different tribes, and still stronger within
the tribe. A friend will often pay the debt of his friend, the
stipulation being that the latter will repay it without interest
to the children of the lender. They take care of the ill and the
old; old people are never abandoned, and in no case are they
killed--unless it be a slave who was ill for a long time. War
prisoners are sometimes eaten. The children are very much petted
and loved. Old and feeble war prisoners are killed, the others
are sold as slaves. They have no religion, no gods, no idols, no
authority of any description; the oldest man in the family is the
judge. In cases of adultery a fine is paid, and part of it goes
to the negoria (the community). The soil is kept in common, but
the crop belongs to those who have grown it. They have pottery,
and know barter-trade--the custom being that the merchant gives
them the goods, whereupon they return to their houses and bring
the native goods required by the merchant; if the latter cannot
be obtained, the European goods are returned.(22) They are
head-hunters, and in so doing they prosecute blood revenge.
'Sometimes,' Finsch says, 'the affair is referred to the Rajah of
Namototte, who terminates it by imposing a fine.'"

When well treated, the Papuas are very kind. Miklukho-Maclay
landed on the eastern coast of New Guinea, followed by one single
man, stayed for two years among tribes reported to be cannibals,
and left them with regret; he returned again to stay one year
more among them, and never had he any conflict to complain of.
True that his rule was never--under no pretext whatever--to
say anything which was not truth, nor make any promise which he
could not keep. These poor creatures, who even do not know how to
obtain fire, and carefully maintain it in their huts, live under
their primitive communism, without any chiefs; and within their
villages they have no quarrels worth speaking of. They work in
common, just enough to get the food of the day; they rear their
children in common; and in the evenings they dress themselves as
coquettishly as they can, and dance. Like all savages, they are
fond of dancing. Each village has its barla, or balai--the
"long house," "longue maison," or "grande maison"--for the
unmarried men, for social gatherings, and for the discussion of
common affairs--again a trait which is common to most
inhabitants of the Pacific Islands, the Eskimos, the Red Indians,
and so on. Whole groups of villages are on friendly terms, and
visit each other en bloc.

Unhappily, feuds are not uncommon--not in consequence of
"Overstocking of the area," or "keen competition," and like
inventions of a mercantile century, but chiefly in consequence of
superstition. As soon as any one falls ill, his friends and
relatives come together, and deliberately discuss who might be
the cause of the illness. All possible enemies are considered,
every one confesses of his own petty quarrels, and finally the
real cause is discovered. An enemy from the next village has
called it down, and a raid upon that village is decided upon.
Therefore, feuds are rather frequent, even between the coast
villages, not to say a word of the cannibal mountaineers who are
considered as real witches and enemies, though, on a closer
acquaintance, they prove to be exactly the same sort of people as
their neighbours on the seacoast.(23)

Many striking pages could be written about the harmony which
prevails in the villages of the Polynesian inhabitants of the
Pacific Islands. But they belong to a more advanced stage of
civilization. So we shall now take our illustrations from the far
north. I must mention, however, before leaving the Southern
Hemisphere, that even the Fuegians, whose reputation has been so
bad, appear under a much better light since they begin to be
better known. A few French missionaries who stay among them "know
of no act of malevolence to complain of." In their clans,
consisting of from 120 to 150 souls, they practise the same
primitive communism as the Papuas; they share everything in
common, and treat their old people very well. Peace prevails
among these tribes.(24) With the Eskimos and their nearest
congeners, the Thlinkets, the Koloshes, and the Aleoutes, we find
one of the nearest illustrations of what man may have been during
the glacial age. Their implements hardly differ from those of
palaeolithic man, and some of their tribes do not yet know
fishing: they simply spear the fish with a kind of harpoon.(25)
They know the use of iron, but they receive it from the
Europeans, or find it on wrecked ships. Their social organization
is of a very primitive kind, though they already have emerged
from the stage of "communal marriage," even under the gentile
restrictions. They live in families, but the family bonds are
often broken; husbands and wives are often exchanged.(26) The
families, however, remain united in clans, and how could it be
otherwise? How could they sustain the hard struggle for life
unless by closely combining their forces? So they do, and the
tribal bonds are closest where the struggle for life is hardest,
namely, in North-East Greenland. The "long house" is their usual
dwelling, and several families lodge in it, separated from each
other by small partitions of ragged furs, with a common passage
in the front. Sometimes the house has the shape of a cross, and
in such case a common fire is kept in the centre. The German
Expedition which spent a winter close by one of those "long
houses" could ascertain that "no quarrel disturbed the peace, no
dispute arose about the use of this narrow space" throughout the
long winter. "Scolding, or even unkind words, are considered as a
misdemeanour, if not produced under the legal form of process,
namely, the nith-song."(27) Close cohabitation and close
interdependence are sufficient for maintaining century after
century that deep respect for the interests of the community
which is characteristic of Eskimo life. Even in the larger
communities of Eskimos, "public opinion formed the real
judgment-seat, the general punishment consisting in the offenders
being shamed in the eyes of the people."(28)

Eskimo life is based upon communism. What is obtained by
hunting and fishing belongs to the clan. But in several tribes,
especially in the West, under the influence of the Danes, private
property penetrates into their institutions. However, they have
an original means for obviating the inconveniences arising from a
personal accumulation of wealth which would soon destroy their
tribal unity. When a man has grown rich, he convokes the folk of
his clan to a great festival, and, after much eating, distributes
among them all his fortune. On the Yukon river, Dall saw an
Aleonte family distributing in this way ten guns, ten full fur
dresses, 200 strings of beads, numerous blankets, ten wolf furs,
200 beavers, and 500 zibelines. After that they took off their
festival dresses, gave them away, and, putting on old ragged
furs, addressed a few words to their kinsfolk, saying that though
they are now poorer than any one of them, they have won their
friendship.(29) Like distributions of wealth appear to be a
regular habit with the Eskimos, and to take place at a certain
season, after an exhibition of all that has been obtained during
the year.(30) In my opinion these distributions reveal a very
old institution, contemporaneous with the first apparition of
personal wealth; they must have been a means for re-establishing
equality among the members of the clan, after it had been
disturbed by the enrichment of the few. The periodical
redistribution of land and the periodical abandonment of all
debts which took place in historical times with so many different
races (Semites, Aryans, etc.), must have been a survival of that
old custom. And the habit of either burying with the dead, or
destroying upon his grave, all that belonged to him personally--
a habit which we find among all primitive races--must have
had the same origin. In fact, while everything that belongs
personally to the dead is burnt or broken upon his grave, nothing
is destroyed of what belonged to him in common with the tribe,
such as boats, or the communal implements of fishing. The
destruction bears upon personal property alone. At a later epoch
this habit becomes a religious ceremony. It receives a mystical
interpretation, and is imposed by religion, when public opinion
alone proves incapable of enforcing its general observance. And,
finally, it is substituted by either burning simple models of the
dead man's property (as in China), or by simply carrying his
property to the grave and taking it back to his house after the
burial ceremony is over--a habit which still prevails with the
Europeans as regards swords, crosses, and other marks of public
distinction.(31)

The high standard of the tribal morality of the Eskimos has
often been mentioned in general literature. Nevertheless the
following remarks upon the manners of the Aleoutes--nearly akin
to the Eskimos--will better illustrate savage morality as a
whole. They were written, after a ten years' stay among the
Aleoutes, by a most remarkable man--the Russian missionary,
Veniaminoff. I sum them up, mostly in his own words:--

Endurability (he wrote) is their chief feature. It is simply
colossal. Not only do they bathe every morning in the frozen sea,
and stand naked on the beach, inhaling the icy wind, but their
endurability, even when at hard work on insufficient food,
surpasses all that can be imagined. During a protracted scarcity
of food, the Aleoute cares first for his children; he gives them
all he has, and himself fasts. They are not inclined to stealing;
that was remarked even by the first Russian immigrants. Not that
they never steal; every Aleoute would confess having sometime
stolen something, but it is always a trifle; the whole is so
childish. The attachment of the parents to their children is
touching, though it is never expressed in words or pettings. The
Aleoute is with difficulty moved to make a promise, but once he
has made it he will keep it whatever may happen. (An Aleoute made
Veniaminoff a gift of dried fish, but it was forgotten on the
beach in the hurry of the departure. He took it home. The next
occasion to send it to the missionary was in January; and in
November and December there was a great scarcity of food in the
Aleoute encampment. But the fish was never touched by the
starving people, and in January it was sent to its destination.)
Their code of morality is both varied and severe. It is
considered shameful to be afraid of unavoidable death; to ask
pardon from an enemy; to die without ever having killed an enemy;
to be convicted of stealing; to capsize a boat in the harbour; to
be afraid of going to sea in stormy weather. to be the first in a
party on a long journey to become an invalid in case of scarcity
of food; to show greediness when spoil is divided, in which case
every one gives his own part to the greedy man to shame him; to
divulge a public secret to his wife; being two persons on a
hunting expedition, not to offer the best game to the partner; to
boast of his own deeds, especially of invented ones; to scold any
one in scorn. Also to beg; to pet his wife in other people's
presence, and to dance with her to bargain personally: selling
must always be made through a third person, who settles the
price. For a woman it is a shame not to know sewing, dancing and
all kinds of woman's work; to pet her husband and children, or
even to speak to her husband in the presence of a stranger.(32)

Such is Aleoute morality, which might also be further
illustrated by their tales and legends. Let me also add that when
Veniaminoff wrote (in 1840) one murder only had been committed
since the last century in a population of 60,000 people, and that
among 1,800 Aleoutes not one single common law offence had been
known for forty years. This will not seem strange if we remark
that scolding, scorning, and the use of rough words are
absolutely unknown in Aleoute life. Even their children never
fight, and never abuse each other in words. All they may say is,
"Your mother does not know sewing," or "Your father is blind of
one eye."(33)

Many features of savage life remain, however, a puzzle to
Europeans. The high development of tribal solidarity and the good
feelings with which primitive folk are animated towards each
other, could be illustrated by any amount of reliable testimony.
And yet it is not the less certain that those same savages
practise infanticide; that in some cases they abandon their old
people, and that they blindly obey the rules of blood-revenge. We
must then explain the coexistence of facts which, to the European
mind, seem so contradictory at the first sight. I have just
mentioned how the Aleoute father starves for days and weeks, and
gives everything eatable to his child; and how the Bushman mother
becomes a slave to follow her child; and I might fill pages with
illustrations of the really tender relations existing among the
savages and their children. Travellers continually mention them
incidentally. Here you read about the fond love of a mother;
there you see a father wildly running through the forest and
carrying upon his shoulders his child bitten by a snake; or a
missionary tells you the despair of the parents at the loss of a
child whom he had saved, a few years before, from being immolated
at its birth. you learn that the "savage" mothers usually nurse
their children till the age of four, and that, in the New
Hebrides, on the loss of a specially beloved child, its mother,
or aunt, will kill herself to take care of it in the other
world.(34) And so on.

Like facts are met with by the score; so that, when we see
that these same loving parents practise infanticide, we are bound
to recognize that the habit (whatever its ulterior
transformations may be) took its origin under the sheer pressure
of necessity, as an obligation towards the tribe, and a means for
rearing the already growing children. The savages, as a rule, do
not "multiply without stint," as some English writers put it. On
the contrary, they take all kinds of measures for diminishing the
birth-rate. A whole series of restrictions, which Europeans
certainly would find extravagant, are imposed to that effect, and
they are strictly obeyed. But notwithstanding that, primitive
folk cannot rear all their children. However, it has been
remarked that as soon as they succeed in increasing their regular
means of subsistence, they at once begin to abandon the practice
of infanticide. On the whole, the parents obey that obligation
reluctantly, and as soon as they can afford it they resort to all
kinds of compromises to save the lives of their new-born. As has
been so well pointed out by my friend Elie Reclus,(35) they
invent the lucky and unlucky days of births, and spare the
children born on the lucky days; they try to postpone the
sentence for a few hours, and then say that if the baby has lived
one day it must live all its natural life.(36) They hear the
cries of the little ones coming from the forest, and maintain
that, if heard, they forbode a misfortune for the tribe; and as
they have no baby-farming nor creches for getting rid of the
children, every one of them recoils before the necessity of
performing the cruel sentence; they prefer to expose the baby in
the wood rather than to take its life by violence. Ignorance, not
cruelty, maintains infanticide; and, instead of moralizing the
savages with sermons, the missionaries would do better to follow
the example of Veniaminoff, who, every year till his old age,
crossed the sea of Okhotsk in a miserable boat, or travelled on
dogs among his Tchuktchis, supplying them with bread and fishing
implements. He thus had really stopped infanticide.

The same is true as regards what superficial observers
describe as parricide. We just now saw that the habit of
abandoning old people is not so widely spread as some writers
have maintained it to be. It has been extremely exaggerated, but
it is occasionally met with among nearly all savages; and in such
cases it has the same origin as the exposure of children. When a
"savage" feels that he is a burden to his tribe; when every
morning his share of food is taken from the mouths of the
children--and the little ones are not so stoical as their
fathers: they cry when they are hungry; when every day he has to
be carried across the stony beach, or the virgin forest, on the
shoulders of younger people there are no invalid carriages, nor
destitutes to wheel them in savage lands--he begins to repeat
what the old Russian peasants say until now-a-day. "Tchujoi vek
zayedayu, Pora na pokoi!" ("I live other people's life: it is
time to retire!") And he retires. He does what the soldier does
in a similar case. When the salvation of his detachment depends
upon its further advance, and he can move no more, and knows that
he must die if left behind, the soldier implores his best friend
to render him the last service before leaving the encampment. And
the friend, with shivering hands, discharges his gun into the
dying body. So the savages do. The old man asks himself to die;
he himself insists upon this last duty towards the community, and
obtains the consent of the tribe; he digs out his grave; he
invites his kinsfolk to the last parting meal. His father has
done so, it is now his turn; and he parts with his kinsfolk with
marks of affection. The savage so much considers death as part of
his duties towards his community, that he not only refuses to be
rescued (as Moffat has told), but when a woman who had to be
immolated on her husband's grave was rescued by missionaries, and
was taken to an island, she escaped in the night, crossed a broad
sea-arm, swimming and rejoined her tribe, to die on the
grave.(37) It has become with them a matter of religion. But the
savages, as a rule, are so reluctant to take any one's life
otherwise than in fight, that none of them will take upon himself
to shed human blood, and they resort to all kinds of stratagems,
which have been so falsely interpreted. In most cases, they
abandon the old man in the wood, after having given him more than
his share of the common food. Arctic expeditions have done the
same when they no more could carry their invalid comrades. "Live
a few days more. may be there will be some unexpected rescue!"
West European men of science, when coming across these facts, are
absolutely unable to stand them; they can not reconcile them with
a high development of tribal morality, and they prefer to cast a
doubt upon the exactitude of absolutely reliable observers,
instead of trying to explain the parallel existence of the two
sets of facts: a high tribal morality together with the
abandonment of the parents and infanticide. But if these same
Europeans were to tell a savage that people, extremely amiable,
fond of their own children, and so impressionable that they cry
when they see a misfortune simulated on the stage, are living in
Europe within a stone's throw from dens in which children die
from sheer want of food, the savage, too, would not understand
them. I remember how vainly I tried to make some of my Tungus
friends understand our civilization of individualism: they could
not, and they resorted to the most fantastical suggestions. The
fact is that a savage, brought up in ideas of a tribal solidarity
in everything for bad and for good, is as incapable of
understanding a "moral" European, who knows nothing of that
solidarity, as the average European is incapable of understanding
the savage. But if our scientist had lived amidst a half-starving
tribe which does not possess among them all one man's food for so
much as a few days to come, he probably might have understood
their motives. So also the savage, if he had stayed among us, and
received our education, may be, would understand our European
indifference towards our neighbours, and our Royal Commissions
for the prevention of "babyfarming." "Stone houses make stony
hearts," the Russian peasants say. But he ought to live in a
stone house first.

Similar remarks must be made as regards cannibalism. Taking
into account all the facts which were brought to light during a
recent controversy on this subject at the Paris Anthropological
Society, and many incidental remarks scattered throughout the
"savage" literature, we are bound to recognize that that practice
was brought into existence by sheer necessity. but that it was
further developed by superstition and religion into the
proportions it attained in Fiji or in Mexico. It is a fact that
until this day many savages are compelled to devour corpses in
the most advanced state of putrefaction, and that in cases of
absolute scarcity some of them have had to disinter and to feed
upon human corpses, even during an epidemic. These are
ascertained facts. But if we now transport ourselves to the
conditions which man had to face during the glacial period, in a
damp and cold climate, with but little vegetable food at his
disposal; if we take into account the terrible ravages which
scurvy still makes among underfed natives, and remember that meat
and fresh blood are the only restoratives which they know, we
must admit that man, who formerly was a granivorous animal,
became a flesh-eater during the glacial period. He found plenty
of deer at that time, but deer often migrate in the Arctic
regions, and sometimes they entirely abandon a territory for a
number of years. In such cases his last resources disappeared.
During like hard trials, cannibalism has been resorted to even by
Europeans, and it was resorted to by the savages. Until the
present time, they occasionally devour the corpses of their own
dead: they must have devoured then the corpses of those who had
to die. Old people died, convinced that by their death they were
rendering a last service to the tribe. This is why cannibalism is
represented by some savages as of divine origin, as something
that has been ordered by a messenger from the sky. But later on
it lost its character of necessity, and survived as a
superstition. Enemies had to be eaten in order to inherit their
courage; and, at a still later epoch, the enemy's eye or heart
was eaten for the same purpose; while among other tribes, already
having a numerous priesthood and a developed mythology, evil
gods, thirsty for human blood, were invented, and human
sacrifices required by the priests to appease the gods. In this
religious phase of its existence, cannibalism attained its most
revolting characters. Mexico is a well-known example; and in
Fiji, where the king could eat any one of his subjects, we also
find a mighty cast of priests, a complicated theology,(38) and a
full development of autocracy. Originated by necessity,
cannibalism became, at a later period, a religious institution,
and in this form it survived long after it had disappeared from
among tribes which certainly practised it in former times, but
did not attain the theocratical stage of evolution. The same
remark must be made as regards infanticide and the abandonment of
parents. In some cases they also have been maintained as a
survival of olden times, as a religiously-kept tradition of the
past.

I will terminate my remarks by mentioning another custom
which also is a source of most erroneous conclusions. I mean the
practice of blood-revenge. All savages are under the impression
that blood shed must be revenged by blood. If any one has been
killed, the murderer must die; if any one has been wounded, the
aggressor's blood must be shed. There is no exception to the
rule, not even for animals; so the hunter's blood is shed on his
return to the village when he has shed the blood of an animal.
That is the savages' conception of justice--a conception which
yet prevails in Western Europe as regards murder. Now, when both
the offender and the offended belong to the same tribe, the tribe
and the offended person settle the affair.(39) But when the
offender belongs to another tribe, and that tribe, for one reason
or another, refuses a compensation, then the offended tribe
decides to take the revenge itself. Primitive folk so much
consider every one's acts as a tribal affair, dependent upon
tribal approval, that they easily think the clan responsible for
every one's acts. Therefore, the due revenge may be taken upon
any member of the offender's clan or relatives.(40) It may often
happen, however, that the retaliation goes further than the
offence. In trying to inflict a wound, they may kill the
offender, or wound him more than they intended to do, and this
becomes a cause for a new feud, so that the primitive legislators
were careful in requiring the retaliation to be limited to an eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, and blood for blood.(41)

It is remarkable, however, that with most primitive folk like
feuds are infinitely rarer than might be expected; though with
some of them they may attain abnormal proportions, especially
with mountaineers who have been driven to the highlands by
foreign invaders, such as the mountaineers of Caucasia, and
especially those of Borneo--the Dayaks. With the Dayaks--we
were told lately--the feuds had gone so far that a young man
could neither marry nor be proclaimed of age before he had
secured the head of an enemy. This horrid practice was fully
described in a modern English work.(42) It appears, however,
that this affirmation was a gross exaggeration. Moreover, Dayak
"head-hunting" takes quite another aspect when we learn that the
supposed "headhunter" is not actuated at all by personal passion.
He acts under what he considers as a moral obligation towards his
tribe, just as the European judge who, in obedience to the same,
evidently wrong, principle of "blood for blood," hands over the
condemned murderer to the hangman. Both the Dayak and the judge
would even feel remorse if sympathy moved them to spare the
murderer. That is why the Dayaks, apart from the murders they
commit when actuated by their conception of justice, are
depicted, by all those who know them, as a most sympathetic
people. Thus Carl Bock, the same author who has given such a
terrible picture of head-hunting, writes:

 "As regards morality, I am bound to assign to the Dayaks a high
place in the scale of civilization.... Robberies and theft are
entirely unknown among them. They also are very truthful.... If I
did not always get the 'whole truth,' I always got, at least,
nothing but the truth from them. I wish I could say the same of
the Malays" (pp. 209 and 210).

Bock's testimony is fully corroborated by that of Ida
Pfeiffer. "I fully recognized," she wrote, "that I should be
pleased longer to travel among them. I usually found them honest,
good, and reserved... much more so than any other nation I
know."(43) Stoltze used almost the same language when speaking
of them. The Dayaks usually have but one wife, and treat her
well. They are very sociable, and every morning the whole clan
goes out for fishing, hunting, or gardening, in large parties.
Their villages consist of big huts, each of which is inhabited by
a dozen families, and sometimes by several hundred persons,
peacefully living together. They show great respect for their
wives, and are fond of their children; and when one of them falls
ill, the women nurse him in turn. As a rule they are very
moderate in eating and drinking. Such is the Dayak in his real
daily life.

It would be a tedious repetition if more illustrations from
savage life were given. Wherever we go we find the same sociable
manners, the same spirit of solidarity. And when we endeavour to
penetrate into the darkness of past ages, we find the same tribal
life, the same associations of men, however primitive, for mutual
support. Therefore, Darwin was quite right when he saw in man's
social qualities the chief factor for his further evolution, and
Darwin's vulgarizers are entirely wrong when they maintain the
contrary.

The small strength and speed of man (he wrote), his want of
natural weapons, etc., are more than counterbalanced, firstly, by
his intellectual faculties (which, he remarked on another page,
have been chiefly or even exclusively gained for the benefit of
the community). and secondly, by his social qualities, which led
him to give and receive aid from his fellow men.(44)

In the last century the "savage" and his "life in the state
of nature" were idealized. But now men of science have gone to
the opposite extreme, especially since some of them, anxious to
prove the animal origin of man, but not conversant with the
social aspects of animal life, began to charge the savage with
all imaginable "bestial" features. It is evident, however, that
this exaggeration is even more unscientific than Rousseau's
idealization. The savage is not an ideal of virtue, nor is he an
ideal of "savagery." But the primitive man has one quality,
elaborated and maintained by the very necessities of his hard
struggle for life--he identifies his own existence with that of
his tribe; and without that quality mankind never would have
attained the level it has attained now.

Primitive folk, as has been already said, so much identify
their lives with that of the tribe, that each of their acts,
however insignificant, is considered as a tribal affair. Their
whole behaviour is regulated by an infinite series of unwritten
rules of propriety which are the fruit of their common experience
as to what is good or bad--that is, beneficial or harmful for
their own tribe. Of course, the reasonings upon which their rules
of propriety are based sometimes are absurd in the extreme. Many
of them originate in superstition; and altogether, in whatever
the savage does, he sees but the immediate consequences of his
acts; he cannot foresee their indirect and ulterior consequences--
thus simply exaggerating a defect with which Bentham
reproached civilized legislators. But, absurd or not, the savage
obeys the prescriptions of the common law, however inconvenient
they may be. He obeys them even more blindly than the civilized
man obeys the prescriptions of the written law. His common law is
his religion; it is his very habit of living. The idea of the
clan is always present to his mind, and self-restriction and
self-sacrifice in the interest of the clan are of daily
occurrence. If the savage has infringed one of the smaller tribal
rules, he is prosecuted by the mockeries of the women. If the
infringement is grave, he is tortured day and night by the fear
of having called a calamity upon his tribe. If he has wounded by
accident any one of his own clan, and thus has committed the
greatest of all crimes, he grows quite miserable: he runs away in
the woods, and is ready to commit suicide, unless the tribe
absolves him by inflicting upon him a physical pain and sheds
some of his own blood.(45) Within the tribe everything is shared
in common; every morsel of food is divided among all present; and
if the savage is alone in the woods, he does not begin eating
before he has loudly shouted thrice an invitation to any one who
may hear his voice to share his meal.(46)

In short, within the tribe the rule of "each for all" is
supreme, so long as the separate family has not yet broken up the
tribal unity. But that rule is not extended to the neighbouring
clans, or tribes, even when they are federated for mutual
protection. Each tribe, or clan, is a separate unity. Just as
among mammals and birds, the territory is roughly allotted among
separate tribes, and, except in times of war, the boundaries are
respected. On entering the territory of his neighbours one must
show that he has no bad intentions. The louder one heralds his
coming, the more confidence he wins; and if he enters a house, he
must deposit his hatchet at the entrance. But no tribe is bound
to share its food with the others: it may do so or it may not.
Therefore the life of the savage is divided into two sets of
actions, and appears under two different ethical aspects: the
relations within the tribe, and the relations with the outsiders;
and (like our international law) the "inter-tribal" law widely
differs from the common law. Therefore, when it comes to a war
the most revolting cruelties may be considered as so many claims
upon the admiration of the tribe. This double conception of
morality passes through the whole evolution of mankind, and
maintains itself until now. We Europeans have realized some
progress--not immense, at any rate--in eradicating that
double conception of ethics; but it also must be said that while
we have in some measure extended our ideas of solidarity--in
theory, at least--over the nation, and partly over other
nations as well, we have lessened the bonds of solidarity within
our own nations, and even within our own families.

The appearance of a separate family amidst the clan
necessarily disturbs the established unity. A separate family
means separate property and accumulation of wealth. We saw how
the Eskimos obviate its inconveniences; and it is one of the most
interesting studies to follow in the course of ages the different
institutions (village communities, guilds, and so on) by means of
which the masses endeavoured to maintain the tribal unity,
notwithstanding the agencies which were at work to break it down.
On the other hand, the first rudiments of knowledge which
appeared at an extremely remote epoch, when they confounded
themselves with witchcraft, also became a power in the hands of
the individual which could be used against the tribe. They were
carefully kept in secrecy, and transmitted to the initiated only,
in the secret societies of witches, shamans, and priests, which
we find among all savages. By the same time, wars and invasions
created military authority, as also castes of warriors, whose
associations or clubs acquired great powers. However, at no
period of man's life were wars the normal state of existence.
While warriors exterminated each other, and the priests
celebrated their massacres, the masses continued to live their
daily life, they prosecuted their daily toil. And it is one of
the most interesting studies to follow that life of the masses;
to study the means by which they maintained their own social
organization, which was based upon their own conceptions of
equity, mutual aid, and mutual support--of common law, in a
word, even when they were submitted to the most ferocious
theocracy or autocracy in the State.

NOTES:

1. Nineteenth Century, February 1888, p. 165.

2. The Descent of Man, end of ch. ii. pp. 63 and 64 of the 2nd
edition.

3. Anthropologists who fully endorse the above views as regards
man nevertheless intimate, sometimes, that the apes live in
polygamous families, under the leadership of "a strong and
jealous male." I do not know how far that assertion is based upon
conclusive observation. But the passage from Brehm's Life of
Animals, which is sometimes referred to, can hardly be taken as
very conclusive. It occurs in his general description of monkeys;
but his more detailed descriptions of separate species either
contradict it or do not confirm it. Even as regards the
cercopitheques, Brehm is affirmative in saying that they "nearly
always live in bands, and very seldom in families" (French
edition, p. 59). As to other species, the very numbers of their
bands, always containing many males, render the "polygamous
family" more than doubtful further observation is evidently
wanted.

4. Lubbock, Prehistoric Times, fifth edition, 1890.

5. That extension of the ice-cap is admitted by most of the
geologists who have specially studied the glacial age. The
Russian Geological Survey already has taken this view as regards
Russia, and most German specialists maintain it as regards
Germany. The glaciation of most of the central plateau of France
will not fail to be recognized by the French geologists, when
they pay more attention to the glacial deposits altogether.

6. Prehistoric Times, pp. 232 and 242.

7. Bachofen, Das Mutterrecht, Stuttgart, 1861; Lewis H. Morgan,
Ancient Society, or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress
from Savagery through Barbarism to Civilization, New York, 1877;
J.F. MacLennan, Studies in Ancient History, 1st series, new
edition, 1886; 2nd series, 1896; L. Fison and A.W. Howitt,
Kamilaroi and Kurnai, Melbourne. These four writers--as has
been very truly remarked by Giraud Teulon,--starting from
different facts and different general ideas, and following
different methods, have come to the same conclusion. To Bachofen
we owe the notion of the maternal family and the maternal
succession; to Morgan--the system of kinship, Malayan and
Turanian, and a highly gifted sketch of the main phases of human
evolution; to MacLennan--the law of exogeny; and to Fison and
Howitt--the cuadro, or scheme, of the conjugal societies in
Australia. All four end in establishing the same fact of the
tribal origin of the family. When Bachofen first drew attention
to the maternal family, in his epoch-making work, and Morgan
described the clan-organization,--both concurring to the almost
general extension of these forms and maintaining that the
marriage laws lie at the very basis of the consecutive steps of
human evolution, they were accused of exaggeration. However, the
most careful researches prosecuted since, by a phalanx of
students of ancient law, have proved that all races of mankind
bear traces of having passed through similar stages of
development of marriage laws, such as we now see in force among
certain savages. See the works of Post, Dargun, Kovalevsky,
Lubbock, and their numerous followers: Lippert, Mucke, etc.

8. None

9. For the Semites and the Aryans, see especially Prof. Maxim
Kovalevsky's Primitive Law (in Russian), Moscow, 1886 and 1887.
Also his Lectures delivered at Stockholm (Tableau des origines et
de l'evolution de la famille et de la propriete, Stockholm,
1890), which represents an admirable review of the whole
question. Cf. also A. Post, Die Geschlechtsgenossenschaft der
Urzeit, Oldenburg 1875.

10. It would be impossible to enter here into a discussion of the
origin of the marriage restrictions. Let me only remark that a
division into groups, similar to Morgan's Hawaian, exists among
birds; the young broods live together separately from their
parents. A like division might probably be traced among some
mammals as well. As to the prohibition of relations between
brothers and sisters, it is more likely to have arisen, not from
speculations about the bad effects of consanguinity, which
speculations really do not seem probable, but to avoid the
too-easy precocity of like marriages. Under close cohabitation it
must have become of imperious necessity. I must also remark that
in discussing the origin of new customs altogether, we must keep
in mind that the savages, like us, have their "thinkers" and
savants-wizards, doctors, prophets, etc.--whose knowledge and
ideas are in advance upon those of the masses. United as they are
in their secret unions (another almost universal feature) they
are certainly capable of exercising a powerful influence, and of
enforcing customs the utility of which may not yet be recognized
by the majority of the tribe.

11. Col. Collins, in Philips' Researches in South Africa, London,
1828. Quoted by Waitz, ii. 334.

12. Lichtenstein's Reisen im sudlichen Afrika, ii. Pp. 92, 97.
Berlin, 1811.

13. Waitz, Anthropologie der Naturvolker, ii. pp. 335 seq. See
also Fritsch's Die Eingeboren Afrika's, Breslau, 1872, pp. 386
seq.; and Drei Jahre in Sud Afrika. Also W. Bleck, A Brief
Account of Bushmen Folklore, Capetown, 1875.

14. Elisee Reclus, Geographie Universelle, xiii. 475.

15. P. Kolben, The Present State of the Cape of Good Hope,
translated from the German by Mr. Medley, London, 1731, vol. i.
pp. 59, 71, 333, 336, etc.

16. Quoted in Waitz's Anthropologie, ii. 335 seq.

17. The natives living in the north of Sidney, and speaking the
Kamilaroi language, are best known under this aspect, through the
capital work of Lorimer Fison and A.W. Howitt, Kamilaroi and
Kurnaii, Melbourne, 1880. See also A.W. Howitt's "Further Note on
the Australian Class Systems," in Journal of the Anthropological
Institute, 1889, vol. xviii. p. 31, showing the wide extension of
the same organization in Australia.

18. The Folklore, Manners, etc., of Australian Aborigines,
Adelaide, 1879, p. 11.

19. Grey's Journals of Two Expeditions of Discovery in North-West
and Western Australia, London, 1841, vol. ii. pp. 237, 298.

20. Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie, 1888, vol. xi. p.
652. I abridge the answers.

21. Bulletin de la Societe d'Anthropologie, 1888, vol. xi. p.
386.

22. The same is the practice with the Papuas of Kaimani Bay, who
have a high reputation of honesty. "It never happens that the
Papua be untrue to his promise," Finsch says in Neuguinea und
seine Bewohner, Bremen, 1865, p. 829.

23. Izvestia of the Russian Geographical Society, 1880, pp. 161
seq. Few books of travel give a better insight into the petty
details of the daily life of savages than these scraps from
Maklay's notebooks.

24. L.F. Martial, in Mission Scientifique au Cap Horn, Paris,
1883, vol. i. pp. 183-201.

25. Captain Holm's Expedition to East Greenland.

26. In Australia whole clans have been seen exchanging all their
wives, in order to conjure a calamity (Post, Studien zur
Entwicklungsgeschichte des Familienrechts, 1890, p. 342). More
brotherhood is their specific against calamities.

27. Dr. H. Rink, The Eskimo Tribes, p. 26 (Meddelelser om
Gronland, vol. xi. 1887).

28. Dr. Rink, loc. cit. p. 24. Europeans, grown in the respect of
Roman law, are seldom capable of understanding that force of
tribal authority. "In fact," Dr. Rink writes, "it is not the
exception, but the rule, that white men who have stayed for ten
or twenty years among the Eskimo, return without any real
addition to their knowledge of the traditional ideas upon which
their social state is based. The white man, whether a missionary
or a trader, is firm in his dogmatic opinion that the most vulgar
European is better than the most distinguished native."--The
Eskimo Tribes, p. 31.

29. Dall, Alaska and its Resources, Cambridge, U.S., 1870.

30. Dall saw it in Alaska, Jacobsen at Ignitok in the vicinity of
the Bering Strait. Gilbert Sproat mentions it among the Vancouver
indians; and Dr. Rink, who describes the periodical exhibitions
just mentioned, adds: "The principal use of the accumulation of
personal wealth is for periodically distributing it." He also
mentions (loc. cit. p. 31) "the destruction of property for the
same purpose," (of maintaining equality).

31. See Appendix VIII.

32. Veniaminoff, Memoirs relative to the District of Unalashka
(Russian), 3 vols. St. Petersburg, 1840. Extracts, in English,
from the above are given in Dall's Alaska. A like description of
the Australians' morality is given in Nature, xlii. p. 639.

33. It is most remarkable that several writers (Middendorff,
Schrenk, O. Finsch) described the Ostyaks and Samoyedes in almost
the same words. Even when drunken, their quarrels are
insignificant. "For a hundred years one single murder has been
committed in the tundra;" "their children never fight;" "anything
may be left for years in the tundra, even food and gin, and
nobody will touch it;" and so on. Gilbert Sproat "never witnessed
a fight between two sober natives" of the Aht Indians of
Vancouver Island. "Quarrelling is also rare among their
children." (Rink, loc. cit.) And so on.

34. Gill, quoted in Gerland and Waitz's Anthropologie, v. 641.
See also pp. 636-640, where many facts of parental and filial
love are quoted.

35. Primitive Folk, London, 1891.

36. Gerland, loc. cit. v. 636.

37. Erskine, quoted in Gerland and Waitz's Anthropologie, v. 640.

38. W.T. Pritchard, Polynesian Reminiscences, London, 1866, p.
363.

39. It is remarkable, however, that in case of a sentence of
death, nobody will take upon himself to be the executioner. Every
one throws his stone, or gives his blow with the hatchet,
carefully avoiding to give a mortal blow. At a later epoch, the
priest will stab the victim with a sacred knife. Still later, it
will be the king, until civilization invents the hired hangman.
See Bastian's deep remarks upon this subject in Der Mensch in der
Geschichte, iii. Die Blutrache, pp. 1-36. A remainder of this
tribal habit, I am told by Professor E. Nys, has survived in
military executions till our own times. In the middle portion of
the nineteenth century it was the habit to load the rifles of the
twelve soldiers called out for shooting the condemned victim,
with eleven ball-cartridges and one blank cartridge. As the
soldiers never knew who of them had the latter, each one could
console his disturbed conscience by thinking that he was not one
of the murderers.

40. In Africa, and elsewhere too, it is a widely-spread habit,
that if a theft has been committed, the next clan has to restore
the equivalent of the stolen thing, and then look itself for the
thief. A. H. Post, Afrikanische Jurisprudenz, Leipzig, 1887, vol.
i. p. 77.

41. See Prof. M. Kovalevsky's Modern Customs and Ancient Law
(Russian), Moscow, 1886, vol. ii., which contains many important
considerations upon this subject.

42. See Carl Bock, The Head Hunters of Borneo, London, 1881. I am
told, however, by Sir Hugh Law, who was for a long time Governor
of Borneo, that the "head-hunting" described in this book is
grossly exaggerated. Altogether, my informant speaks of the
Dayaks in exactly the same sympathetic terms as Ida Pfeiffer. Let
me add that Mary Kingsley speaks in her book on West Africa in
the same sympathetic terms of the Fans, who had been represented
formerly as the most "terrible cannibals."

43. Ida Pfeiffer, Meine zweite Weltrieze, Wien, 1856, vol. i. pp.
116 seq. See also Muller and Temminch's Dutch Possessions in
Archipelagic India, quoted by Elisee Reclus, in Geographie
Universelle, xiii.

44. Descent of Man, second ed., pp. 63, 64.

45. See Bastian's Mensch in der Geschichte, iii. p. 7. Also Grey,
loc. cit. ii. p. 238.

46. Miklukho-Maclay, loc. cit. Same habit with the Hottentots.






CHAPTER IV

MUTUAL AID AMONG THE BARBARIANS

The great migrations. New organization rendered necessary. 
The village community. Communal work. Judicial procedure.
Inter-tribal law. Illustrations from the life of our contemporaries. 
Buryates. Kabyles. Caucasian mountaineers. African stems.





It is not possible to study primitive mankind without being
deeply impressed by the sociability it has displayed since its
very first steps in life. Traces of human societies are found in
the relics of both the oldest and the later stone age; and, when
we come to observe the savages whose manners of life are still
those of neolithic man, we find them closely bound together by an
extremely ancient clan organization which enables them to combine
their individually weak forces, to enjoy life in common, and to
progress. Man is no exception in nature. He also is subject to
the great principle of Mutual Aid which grants the best chances
of survival to those who best support each other in the struggle
for life. These were the conclusions arrived at in the previous
chapters.

However, as soon as we come to a higher stage of civilization, and
refer to history which already has something to say about that
stage, we are bewildered by the struggles and conflicts which it
reveals. The old bonds seem entirely to be broken. Stems are seen
to fight against stems, tribes against tribes, individuals against
individuals; and out of this chaotic contest of hostile forces,
mankind issues divided into castes, enslaved to despots, separated
into States always ready to wage war against each other. And, with
this history of mankind in his hands, the pessimist philosopher
triumphantly concludes that warfare and oppression are the very
essence of human nature; that the warlike and predatory instincts
of man can only be restrained within certain limits by a strong
authority which enforces peace and thus gives an opportunity to
the few and nobler ones to prepare a better life for humanity in
times to come.

And yet, as soon as the every-day life of man during the historical
period is submitted to a closer analysis and so it has been, of
late, by many patient students of very early institutions--it
appears at once under quite a different aspect. Leaving aside the
preconceived ideas of most historians and their pronounced
predilection for the dramatic aspects of history, we see that the
very documents they habitually peruse are such as to exaggerate the
part of human life given to struggles and to underrate its peaceful
moods. The bright and sunny days are lost sight of in the gales and
storms. Even in our own time, the cumbersome records which we
prepare for the future historian, in our Press, our law courts, our
Government offices, and even in our fiction and poetry, suffer from
the same one-sidedness. They hand down to posterity the most minute
descriptions of every war, every battle and skirmish, every contest
and act of violence, every kind of individual suffering; but they
hardly bear any trace of the countless acts of mutual support and
devotion which every one of us knows from his own experience; they
hardly. take notice of what makes the very essence of our daily
life--our social instincts and manners. No wonder, then, if the
records of the past were so imperfect. The annalists of old never
failed to chronicle the petty wars and calamities which harassed
their contemporaries; but they paid no attention whatever to the
life of the masses, although the masses chiefly used to toil
peacefully while the few indulged in fighting. The epic poems, the
inscriptions on monuments, the treaties of peace--nearly all
historical documents bear the same character; they deal with
breaches of peace, not with peace itself. So that the
best-intentioned historian unconsciously draws a distorted picture
of the times he endeavours to depict; and, to restore the real
proportion between conflict and union, we are now bound to enter
into a minute analysis of thousands of small facts and faint
indications accidentally preserved in the relics of the past; to
interpret them with the aid of comparative ethnology; and, after
having heard so much about what used to divide men, to reconstruct
stone by stone the institutions which used to unite them.

Ere long history will have to be re-written on new lines, so
as to take into account these two currents of human life and to
appreciate the part played by each of them in evolution. But in
the meantime we may avail ourselves of the immense preparatory
work recently done towards restoring the leading features of the
second current, so much neglected. From the better-known periods
of history we may take some illustrations of the life of the
masses, in order to indicate the part played by mutual support
during those periods; and, in so doing, we may dispense (for the
sake of brevity) from going as far back as the Egyptian, or even
the Greek and Roman antiquity. For, in fact, the evolution of
mankind has not had the character of one unbroken series. Several
times civilization came to an end in one given region, with one
given race, and began anew elsewhere, among other races. But at
each fresh start it began again with the same clan institutions
which we have seen among the savages. So that if we take the last
start of our own civilization, when it began afresh in the first
centuries of our era, among those whom the Romans called the
"barbarians," we shall have the whole scale of evolution,
beginning with the gentes and ending in the institutions of our
own time. To these illustrations the following pages will be
devoted.

Men of science have not yet settled upon the causes which
some two thousand years ago drove whole nations from Asia into
Europe and resulted in the great migrations of barbarians which
put an end to the West Roman Empire. One cause, however, is
naturally suggested to the geographer as he contemplates the
ruins of populous cities in the deserts of Central Asia, or
follows the old beds of rivers now disappeared and the wide
outlines of lakes now reduced to the size of mere ponds. It is
desiccation: a quite recent desiccation, continued still at a
speed which we formerly were not prepared to admit.(1) Against
it man was powerless. When the inhabitants of North-West Mongolia
and East Turkestan saw that water was abandoning them, they had
no course open to them but to move down the broad valleys leading
to the lowlands, and to thrust westwards the inhabitants of the
plains.(2) Stems after stems were thus thrown into Europe,
compelling other stems to move and to remove for centuries in
succession, westwards and eastwards, in search of new and more or
less permanent abodes. Races were mixing with races during those
migrations, aborigines with immigrants, Aryans with
Ural-Altayans; and it would have been no wonder if the social
institutions which had kept them together in their mother
countries had been totally wrecked during the stratification of
races which took place in Europe and Asia. But they were not
wrecked; they simply underwent the modification which was
required by the new conditions of life.

The Teutons, the Celts, the Scandinavians, the Slavonians,
and others, when they first came in contact with the Romans, were
in a transitional state of social organization. The clan unions,
based upon a real or supposed common origin, had kept them
together for many thousands of years in succession. But these
unions could answer their purpose so long only as there were no
separate families within the gens or clan itself. However, for
causes already mentioned, the separate patriarchal family had
slowly but steadily developed within the clans, and in the long
run it evidently meant the individual accumulation of wealth and
power, and the hereditary transmission of both. The frequent
migrations of the barbarians and the ensuing wars only hastened
the division of the gentes into separate families, while the
dispersing of stems and their mingling with strangers offered
singular facilities for the ultimate disintegration of those
unions which were based upon kinship. The barbarians thus stood
in a position of either seeing their clans dissolved into loose
aggregations of families, of which the wealthiest, especially if
combining sacerdotal functions or military repute with wealth,
would have succeeded in imposing their authority upon the others;
or of finding out some new form of organization based upon some
new principle.

Many stems had no force to resist disintegration: they broke
up and were lost for history. But the more vigorous ones did not
disintegrate. They came out of the ordeal with a new organization--
the village community--which kept them together for the next
fifteen centuries or more. The conception of a common territory,
appropriated or protected by common efforts, was elaborated, and
it took the place of the vanishing conceptions of common descent.
The common gods gradually lost their character of ancestors and
were endowed with a local territorial character. They became the
gods or saints of a given locality; "the land" was identified
with its inhabitants. Territorial unions grew up instead of the
consanguine unions of old, and this new organization evidently
offered many advantages under the given circumstances. It
recognized the independence of the family and even emphasized it,
the village community disclaiming all rights of interference in
what was going on within the family enclosure; it gave much more
freedom to personal initiative; it was not hostile in principle
to union between men of different descent, and it maintained at
the same time the necessary cohesion of action and thought, while
it was strong enough to oppose the dominative tendencies of the
minorities of wizards, priests, and professional or distinguished
warriors. Consequently it became the primary cell of future
organization, and with many nations the village community has
retained this character until now.

It is now known, and scarcely contested, that the village
community was not a specific feature of the Slavonians, nor even
of the ancient Teutons. It prevailed in England during both the
Saxon and Norman times, and partially survived till the last
century;(3) it was at the bottom of the social organization of
old Scotland, old Ireland, and old Wales. In France, the communal
possession and the communal allotment of arable land by the
village folkmote persisted from the first centuries of our era
till the times of Turgot, who found the folkmotes "too noisy" and
therefore abolished them. It survived Roman rule in Italy, and
revived after the fall of the Roman Empire. It was the rule with
the Scandinavians, the Slavonians, the Finns (in the pittaya, as
also, probably, the kihla-kunta), the Coures, and the lives. The
village community in India--past and present, Aryan and
non-Aryan--is well known through the epoch-making works of Sir
Henry Maine; and Elphinstone has described it among the Afghans.
We also find it in the Mongolian oulous, the Kabyle thaddart, the
Javanese dessa, the Malayan kota or tofa, and under a variety of
names in Abyssinia, the Soudan, in the interior of Africa, with
natives of both Americas, with all the small and large tribes of
the Pacific archipelagoes. In short, we do not know one single
human race or one single nation which has not had its period of
village communities. This fact alone disposes of the theory
according to which the village community in Europe would have
been a servile growth. It is anterior to serfdom, and even
servile submission was powerless to break it. It was a universal
phase of evolution, a natural outcome of the clan organization,
with all those stems, at least, which have played, or play still,
some part in history.(4)

It was a natural growth, and an absolute uniformity in its
structure was therefore not possible. As a rule, it was a union
between families considered as of common descent and owning a
certain territory in common. But with some stems, and under
certain circumstances, the families used to grow very numerous
before they threw off new buds in the shape of new families;
five, six, or seven generations continued to live under the same
roof, or within the same enclosure, owning their joint household
and cattle in common, and taking their meals at the common
hearth. They kept in such case to what ethnology knows as the
"joint family," or the "undivided household," which we still see
all over China, in India, in the South Slavonian zadruga, and
occasionally find in Africa, in America, in Denmark, in North
Russia, and West France.(5) With other stems, or in other
circumstances, not yet well specified, the families did not
attain the same proportions; the grandsons, and occasionally the
sons, left the household as soon as they were married, and each
of them started a new cell of his own. But, joint or not,
clustered together or scattered in the woods, the families
remained united into village communities; several villages were
grouped into tribes; and the tribes joined into confederations.
Such was the social organization which developed among the
so-called "barbarians," when they began to settle more or less
permanently in Europe.

A very long evolution was required before the gentes, or
clans, recognized the separate existence of a patriarchal family
in a separate hut; but even after that had been recognized, the
clan, as a rule, knew no personal inheritance of property. The
few things which might have belonged personally to the individual
were either destroyed on his grave or buried with him. The
village community, on the contrary, fully recognized the private
accumulation of wealth within the family and its hereditary
transmission. But wealth was conceived exclusively in the shape
of movable property, including cattle, implements, arms, and the
dwelling house which--"like all things that can be destroyed by
fire"--belonged to the same category(6). As to private
property in land, the village community did not, and could not,
recognize anything of the kind, and, as a rule, it does not
recognize it now. The land was the common property of the tribe,
or of the whole stem, and the village community itself owned its
part of the tribal territory so long only as the tribe did not
claim a re-distribution of the village allotments. The clearing
of the woods and the breaking of the prairies being mostly done
by the communities or, at least, by the joint work of several
families--always with the consent of the community--the
cleared plots were held by each family for a term of four,
twelve, or twenty years, after which term they were treated as
parts of the arable land owned in common. Private property, or
possession "for ever" was as incompatible, with the very
principles and the religious conceptions of the village community
as it was with the principles of the gens; so that a long
influence of the Roman law and the Christian Church, which soon
accepted the Roman principles, were required to accustom the
barbarians to the idea of private property in land being
possible.(7) And yet, even when such property, or possession for
an unlimited time, was recognized, the owner of a separate estate
remained a co-proprietor in the waste lands, forests, and
grazing-grounds. Moreover, we continually see, especially in the
history of Russia, that when a few families, acting separately,
had taken possession of some land belonging to tribes which were
treated as strangers, they very soon united together, and
constituted a village community which in the third or fourth
generation began to profess a community of origin.

A whole series of institutions, partly inherited from the
clan period, have developed from that basis of common ownership
of land during the long succession of centuries which was
required to bring the barbarians under the dominion of States
organized upon the Roman or Byzantine pattern. The village
community was not only a union for guaranteeing to each one his
fair. share in the common land, but also a union for common
culture, for mutual support in all possible forms, for protection
from violence, and for a further development of knowledge,
national bonds, and moral conceptions; and every change in the
judicial, military, educational, or economical manners had to be
decided at the folkmotes of the village, the tribe, or the
confederation. The community being a continuation of the gens, it
inherited all its functions. It was the universitas, the mir--a
world in itself.

Common hunting, common fishing, and common culture of the
orchards or the plantations of fruit trees was the rule with the
old gentes. Common agriculture became the rule in the barbarian
village communities. True, that direct testimony to this effect
is scarce, and in the literature of antiquity we only have the
passages of Diodorus and Julius Caesar relating to the
inhabitants of the Lipari Islands, one of the Celt-Iberian
tribes, and the Sueves. But there is no lack of evidence to prove
that common agriculture was practised among some Teuton tribes,
the Franks, and the old Scotch, Irish, and Welsh.(8) As to the
later survivals of the same practice, they simply are countless.
Even in perfectly Romanized France, common culture was habitual
some five and twenty years ago in the Morbihan (Brittany).(9)
The old Welsh cyvar, or joint team, as well as the common culture
of the land allotted to the use of the village sanctuary are
quite common among the tribes of Caucasus the least touched by
civilization,(10) and like facts are of daily occurrence among
the Russian peasants. Moreover, it is well known that many tribes
of Brazil, Central America, and Mexico used to cultivate their
fields in common, and that the same habit is widely spread among
some Malayans, in New Caledonia, with several Negro stems, and so
on.(11) In short, communal culture is so habitual with many
Aryan, Ural-Altayan, Mongolian, Negro, Red Indian, Malayan, and
Melanesian stems that we must consider it as a universal--
though not as the only possible--form of primitive
agriculture.(12)

Communal cultivation does not, however, imply by necessity
communal consumption. Already under the clan organization we
often see that when the boats laden with fruits or fish return to
the village, the food they bring in is divided among the huts and
the "long houses" inhabited by either several families or the
youth, and is cooked separately at each separate hearth. The
habit of taking meals in a narrower circle of relatives or
associates thus prevails at an early period of clan life. It
became the rule in the village community. Even the food grown in
common was usually divided between the households after part of
it had been laid in store for communal use. However, the
tradition of communal meals was piously kept alive; every
available opportunity, such as the commemoration of the
ancestors, the religious festivals, the beginning and the end of
field work, the births, the marriages, and the funerals, being
seized upon to bring the community to a common meal. Even now
this habit, well known in this country as the "harvest supper,"
is the last to disappear. On the other hand, even when the fields
had long since ceased to be tilled and sown in common, a variety
of agricultural work continued, and continues still, to be
performed by the community. Some part of the communal land is
still cultivated in many cases in common, either for the use of
the destitute, or for refilling the communal stores, or for using
the produce at the religious festivals. The irrigation canals are
digged and repaired in common. The communal meadows are mown by
the community; and the sight of a Russian commune mowing a meadow--
the men rivalling each other in their advance with the scythe,
while the women turn the grass over and throw it up into heaps--
is one of the most inspiring sights; it shows what human work
might be and ought to be. The hay, in such case, is divided among
the separate households, and it is evident that no one has the
right of taking hay from a neighbour's stack without his
permission; but the limitation of this last rule among the
Caucasian Ossetes is most noteworthy. When the cuckoo cries and
announces that spring is coming, and that the meadows will soon
be clothed again with grass, every one in need has the right of
taking from a neighbour's stack the hay he wants for his
cattle.(13) The old communal rights are thus re-asserted, as if
to prove how contrary unbridled individualism is to human nature.

When the European traveller lands in some small island of the
Pacific, and, seeing at a distance a grove of palm trees, walks
in that direction, he is astonished to discover that the little
villages are connected by roads paved with big stones, quite
comfortable for the unshod natives, and very similar to the "old
roads" of the Swiss mountains. Such roads were traced by the
"barbarians" all over Europe, and one must have travelled in
wild, thinly-peopled countries, far away from the chief lines of
communication, to realize in full the immense work that must have
been performed by the barbarian communities in order to conquer
the woody and marshy wilderness which Europe was some two
thousand years ago. Isolated families, having no tools, and weak
as they were, could not have conquered it; the wilderness would
have overpowered them. Village communities alone, working in
common, could master the wild forests, the sinking marshes, and
the endless steppes. The rough roads, the ferries, the wooden
bridges taken away in the winter and rebuilt after the spring
flood was over, the fences and the palisaded walls of the
villages, the earthen forts and the small towers with which the
territory was dottedall these were the work of the barbarian
communities. And when a community grew numerous it used to throw
off a new bud. A new community arose at a distance, thus step by
step bringing the woods and the steppes Under the dominion of
man. The whole making of European nations was such a budding of
the village communities. Even now-a-days the Russian peasants, if
they are not quite broken down by misery, migrate in communities,
and they till the soil and build the houses in com mon when they
settle on the banks of the Amur, or in Manitoba. And even the
English, when they first began to colonize America, used to
return to the old system; they grouped into village
communities.(14)

The village community was the chief arm of the barbarians in
their hard struggle against a hostile nature. It also was the
bond they opposed to oppression by the cunningest and the
strongest which so easily might have developed during those
disturbed times. The imaginary barbarian--the man who fights
and kills at his mere caprice--existed no more than the
"bloodthirsty" savage. The real barbarian was living, on the
contrary, under a wide series of institutions, imbued with
considerations as to what may be useful or noxious to his tribe
or confederation, and these institutions were piously handed down
from generation to generation in verses and songs, in proverbs or
triads, in sentences and instructions. The more we study them the
more we recognize the narrow bonds which united men in their
villages. Every quarrel arising between two individuals was
treated as a communal affair--even the offensive words that
might have been uttered during a quarrel being considered as an
offence to the community and its ancestors. They had to be
repaired by amends made both to the individual and the
community;(15) and if a quarrel ended in a fight and wounds, the
man who stood by and did not interpose was treated as if he
himself had inflicted the wounds.(16) The judicial procedure was
imbued with the same spirit. Every dispute was brought first
before mediators or arbiters, and it mostly ended with them, the
arbiters playing a very important part in barbarian society. But
if the case was too grave to be settled in this way, it came
before the folkmote, which was bound "to find the sentence," and
pronounced it in a conditional form; that is, "such compensation
was due, if the wrong be proved," and the wrong had to be proved
or disclaimed by six or twelve persons confirming or denying the
fact by oath; ordeal being resorted to in case of contradiction
between the two sets of jurors. Such procedure, which remained in
force for more than two thousand years in succession, speaks
volumes for itself; it shows how close were the bonds between all
members of the community. Moreover, there was no other authority
to enforce the decisions of the folkmote besides its own moral
authority. The only possible menace was that the community might
declare the rebel an outlaw, but even this menace was reciprocal.
A man discontented with the folkmote could declare that he would
abandon the tribe and go over to another tribe--a most dreadful
menace, as it was sure to bring all kinds of misfortunes upon a
tribe that might have been unfair to one of its members.(17) A
rebellion against a right decision of the customary law was
simply "inconceivable," as Henry Maine has so well said, because
"law, morality, and fact" could not be separated from each other
in those times.(18) The moral authority of the commune was so
great that even at a much later epoch, when the village
communities fell into submission to the feudal lord, they
maintained their judicial powers; they only permitted the lord,
or his deputy, to "find" the above conditional sentence in
accordance with the customary law he had sworn to follow, and to
levy for himself the fine (the fred) due to the commune. But for
a long time, the lord himself, if he remained a co-proprietor in
the waste land of the commune, submitted in communal affairs to
its decisions. Noble or ecclesiastic, he had to submit to the
folkmote--Wer daselbst Wasser und Weid genusst, muss gehorsam
sein--"Who enjoys here the right of water and pasture must
obey"--was the old saying. Even when the peasants became serfs
under the lord, he was bound to appear before the folkmote when
they summoned him.(19)

In their conceptions of justice the barbarians evidently did
not much differ from the savages. They also maintained the idea
that a murder must be followed by putting the murderer to death;
that wounds had to be punished by equal wounds, and that the
wronged family was bound to fulfil the sentence of the customary
law. This was a holy duty, a duty towards the ancestors, which
had to be accomplished in broad daylight, never in secrecy, and
rendered widely known. Therefore the most inspired passages of
the sagas and epic poetry altogether are those which glorify what
was supposed to be justice. The gods themselves joined in aiding
it. However, the predominant feature of barbarian justice is, on
the one hand, to limit the numbers of persons who may be involved
in a feud, and, on the other hand, to extirpate the brutal idea
of blood for blood and wounds for wounds, by substituting for it
the system of compensation. The barbarian codes which were
collections of common law rules written down for the use of
judges--"first permitted, then encouraged, and at last
enforced," compensation instead of revenge.(20) The compensation
has, however, been totally misunderstood by those who represented
it as a fine, and as a sort of carte blanche given to the rich
man to do whatever he liked. The compensation money (wergeld),
which was quite different from the fine or fred,(21) was
habitually so high for all kinds of active offences that it
certainly was no encouragement for such offences. In case of a
murder it usually exceeded all the possible fortune of the
murderer "Eighteen times eighteen cows" is the compensation with
the Ossetes who do not know how to reckon above eighteen, while
with the African tribes it attains 800 cows or 100 camels with
their young, or 416 sheep in the poorer tribes.(22) In the great
majority of cases, the compensation money could not be paid at
all, so that the murderer had no issue but to induce the wronged
family, by repentance, to adopt him. Even now, in the Caucasus,
when feuds come to an end, the offender touches with his lips the
breast of the oldest woman of the tribe, and becomes a
"milk-brother" to all men of the wronged family.(23) With
several African tribes he must give his daughter, or sister, in
marriage to some one of the family; with other tribes he is bound
to marry the woman whom he has made a widow; and in all cases he
becomes a member of the family, whose opinion is taken in all
important family matters.(24)

Far from acting with disregard to human life, the barbarians,
moreover, knew nothing of the horrid punishments introduced at a
later epoch by the laic and canonic laws under Roman and
Byzantine influence. For, if the Saxon code admitted the death
penalty rather freely even in cases of incendiarism and armed
robbery, the other barbarian codes pronounced it exclusively in
cases of betrayal of one's kin, and sacrilege against the
community's gods, as the only means to appease the gods.

All this, as seen is very far from the supposed "moral
dissoluteness" of the barbarians. On the contrary, we cannot but
admire the deeply moral principles elaborated within the early
village communities which found their expression in Welsh triads,
in legends about King Arthur, in Brehon commentaries,(25) in old
German legends and so on, or find still their expression in the
sayings of the modern barbarians. In his introduction to The
Story of Burnt Njal, George Dasent very justly sums up as follows
the qualities of a Northman, as they appear in the sagas:--

To do what lay before him openly and like a man, without fear
of either foes, fiends, or fate;... to be free and daring in all
his deeds; to be gentle and generous to his friends and kinsmen;
to be stern and grim to his foes [those who are under the lex
talionis], but even towards them to fulfil all bounden duties....
To be no truce-breaker, nor tale-bearer, nor backbiter. To utter
nothing against any man that he would not dare to tell him to his
face. To turn no man from his door who sought food or shelter,
even though he were a foe.(26)

The same or still better principles permeate the Welsh epic
poetry and triads. To act "according to the nature of mildness
and the principles of equity," without regard to the foes or to
the friends, and "to repair the wrong," are the highest duties of
man; "evil is death, good is life," exclaims the poet
legislator.(27) "The World would be fool, if agreements made on
lips were not honourable"--the Brehon law says. And the humble
Shamanist Mordovian, after having praised the same qualities,
will add, moreover, in his principles of customary law, that
"among neighbours the cow and the milking-jar are in common."
that, "the cow must be milked for yourself and him who may ask
milk;" that "the body of a child reddens from the stroke, but the
face of him who strikes reddens from shame;"(28) and so on. Many
pages might be filled with like principles expressed and followed
by the "barbarians."

One feature more of the old village communities deserves a
special mention. It is the gradual extension of the circle of men
embraced by the feelings of solidarity. Not only the tribes
federated into stems, but the stems as well, even though of
different origin, joined together in confederations. Some unions
were so close that, for instance, the Vandals, after part of
their confederation had left for the Rhine, and thence went over
to Spain and Africa, respected for forty consecutive years the
landmarks and the abandoned villages of their confederates, and
did not take possession of them until they had ascertained
through envoys that their confederates did not intend to return.
With other barbarians, the soil was cultivated by one part of the
stem, while the other part fought on or beyond the frontiers of
the common territory. As to the leagues between several stems,
they were quite habitual. The Sicambers united with the
Cherusques and the Sueves, the Quades with the Sarmates; the
Sarmates with the Alans, the Carpes, and the Huns. Later on, we
also see the conception of nations gradually developing in
Europe, long before anything like a State had grown in any part
of the continent occupied by the barbarians. These nations--for
it is impossible to refuse the name of a nation to the
Merovingian France, or to the Russia of the eleventh and twelfth
century--were nevertheless kept together by nothing else but a
community of language, and a tacit agreement of the small
republics to take their dukes from none but one special family.

Wars were certainly unavoidable; migration means war; but Sir
Henry Maine has already fully proved in his remarkable study of
the tribal origin of International Law, that "Man has never been
so ferocious or so stupid as to submit to such an evil as war
without some kind of effort to prevent it," and he has shown how
exceedingly great is "the number of ancient institutions which
bear the marks of a design to stand in the way of war, or to
provide an alternative to it."(29) In reality, man is so far
from the warlike being he is supposed to be, that when the
barbarians had once settled they so rapidly lost the very habits
of warfare that very soon they were compelled to keep special
dukes followed by special scholae or bands of warriors, in order
to protect them from possible intruders. They preferred peaceful
toil to war, the very peacefulness of man being the cause of the
specialization of the warrior's trade, which specialization
resulted later on in serfdom and in all the wars of the "States
period" of human history.

History finds great difficulties in restoring to life the
institutions of the barbarians. At every step the historian meets
with some faint indication which he is unable to explain with the
aid of his own documents only. But a broad light is thrown on the
past as soon as we refer to the institutions of the very numerous
tribes which are still living under a social organization almost
identical with that of our barbarian ancestors. Here we simply
have the difficulty of choice, because the islands of the
Pacific, the steppes of Asia, and the tablelands of Africa are
real historical museums containing specimens of all possible
intermediate stages which mankind has lived through, when passing
from the savage gentes up to the States' organization. Let us,
then, examine a few of those specimens.

If we take the village communities of the Mongol Buryates,
especially those of the Kudinsk Steppe on the upper Lena which
have better escaped Russian influence, we have fair
representatives of barbarians in a transitional state, between
cattle-breeding and agriculture.(30) These Buryates are still
living in "joint families"; that is, although each son, when he
is married, goes to live in a separate hut, the huts of at least
three generations remain within the same enclosure, and the joint
family work in common in their fields, and own in common their
joint households and their cattle, as well as their "calves'
grounds" (small fenced patches of soil kept under soft grass for
the rearing of calves). As a rule, the meals are taken separately
in each hut; but when meat is roasted, all the twenty to sixty
members of the joint household feast together. Several joint
households which live in a cluster, as well as several smaller
families settled in the same village--mostly debris of joint
households accidentally broken up--make the oulous, or the
village community. several oulouses make a tribe; and the,
forty-six tribes, or clans, of the Kudinsk Steppe are united into
one confederation. Smaller and closer confederations are entered
into, as necessity arises for special wants, by several tribes.
They know no private property in land--the land being held in
common by the oulous, or rather by the confederation, and if it
becomes necessary, the territory is re-allotted between the
different oulouses at a folkmote of the tribe, and between the
forty-six tribes at a folkmote of the confederation. It is worthy
of note that the same organization prevails among all the 250,000
Buryates of East Siberia, although they have been for three
centuries under Russian rule, and are well acquainted with
Russian institutions.

With all that, inequalities of fortune rapidly develop among
the Buryates, especially since the Russian Government is giving
an exaggerated importance to their elected taishas (princes),
whom it considers as responsible tax-collectors and
representatives of the confederations in their administrative and
even commercial relations with the Russians. The channels for the
enrichment of the few are thus many, while the impoverishment of
the great number goes hand in hand, through the appropriation of
the Buryate lands by the Russians. But it is a habit with the
Buryates, especially those of Kudinsk--and habit is more than
law--that if a family has lost its cattle, the richer families
give it some cows and horses that it may recover. As to the
destitute man who has no family, he takes his meals in the huts
of his congeners; he enters a hut, takes--by right, not for
charity--his seat by the fire, and shares the meal which always
is scrupulously divided into equal parts; he sleeps where he has
taken his evening meal. Altogether, the Russian conquerors of
Siberia were so much struck by the communistic practices of the
Buryates, that they gave them the name of Bratskiye--"the
Brotherly Ones"--and reported to Moscow. "With them everything
is in common; whatever they have is shared in common." Even now,
when the Lena Buryates sell their wheat, or send some of their
cattle to be sold to a Russian butcher, the families of the
oulous, or the tribe, put their wheat and cattle together, and
sell it as a whole. Each oulous has, moreover, its grain store
for loans in case of need, its communal baking oven (the four
banal of the old French communities), and its blacksmith, who,
like the blacksmith of the Indian communities,(31) being a
member of the community, is never paid for his work within the
community. He must make it for nothing, and if he utilizes his
spare time for fabricating the small plates of chiselled and
silvered iron which are used in Buryate land for the decoration
of dress, he may occasionally sell them to a woman from another
clan, but to the women of his own clan the attire is presented as
a gift. Selling and buying cannot take place within the
community, and the rule is so severe that when a richer family
hires a labourer the labourer must be taken from another clan or
from among the Russians. This habit is evidently not specific to
the Buryates; it is so widely spread among the modern barbarians,
Aryan and Ural-Altayan, that it must have been universal among
our ancestors.

The feeling of union within the confederation is kept alive
by the common interests of the tribes, their folkmotes, and the
festivities which are usually kept in connection with the
folkmotes. The same feeling is, however, maintained by another
institution, the aba, or common hunt, which is a reminiscence of
a very remote past. Every autumn, the forty-six clans of Kudinsk
come together for such a hunt, the produce of which is divided
among all the families. Moreover, national abas, to assert the
unity of the whole Buryate nation, are convoked from time to
time. In such cases, all Buryate clans which are scattered for
hundreds of miles west and east of Lake Baikal, are bound to send
their delegate hunters. Thousands of men come together, each one
bringing provisions for a whole month. Every one's share must be
equal to all the others, and therefore, before being put
together, they are weighed by an elected elder (always "with the
hand": scales would be a profanation of the old custom). After
that the hunters divide into bands of twenty, and the parties go
hunting according to a well-settled plan. In such abas the entire
Buryate nation revives its epic traditions of a time when it was
united in a powerful league. Let me add that such communal hunts
are quite usual with the Red Indians and the Chinese on the banks
of the Usuri (the kada).(32)

With the Kabyles, whose manners of life have been so well
described by two French explorers,(33) we have barbarians still
more advanced in agriculture. Their fields, irrigated and
manured, are well attended to, and in the hilly tracts every
available plot of land is cultivated by the spade. The Kabyles
have known many vicissitudes in their history; they have followed
for sometime the Mussulman law of inheritance, but, being adverse
to it, they have returned, 150 years ago, to the tribal customary
law of old. Accordingly, their land-tenure is of a mixed
character, and private property in land exists side by side with
communal possession. Still, the basis of their present
organization is the village community, the thaddart, which
usually consists of several joint families (kharoubas), claiming
a community of origin, as well as of smaller families of
strangers. Several villages are grouped into clans or tribes
(arch); several tribes make the confederation (thak'ebilt); and
several confederations may occasionally enter into a league,
chiefly for purposes of armed defence.

The Kabyles know no authority whatever besides that of the
djemmaa, or folkmote of the village community. All men of age
take part in it, in the open air, or in a special building
provided with stone seats. and the decisions of the djemmaa are
evidently taken at unanimity: that is, the discussions continue
until all present agree to accept, or to submit to, some
decision. There being no authority in a village community to
impose a decision, this system has been practised by mankind
wherever there have been village communities, and it is practised
still wherever they continue to exist, i.e. by several hundred
million men all over the world. The djemmaa nominates its
executive--the elder, the scribe, and the treasurer; it
assesses its own taxes; and it manages the repartition of the
common lands, as well as all kinds of works of public utility. A
great deal of work is done in common: the roads, the mosques, the
fountains, the irrigation canals, the towers erected for
protection from robbers, the fences, and so on, are built by the
village community; while the high-roads, the larger mosques, and
the great market-places are the work of the tribe. Many traces of
common culture continue to exist, and the houses continue to be
built by, or with the aid of, all men and women of the village.
Altogether, the "aids" are of daily occurrence, and are
continually called in for the cultivation of the fields, for
harvesting, and so on. As to the skilled work, each community has
its blacksmith, who enjoys his part of the communal land, and
works for the community; when the tilling season approaches he
visits every house, and repairs the tools and the ploughs,
without expecting any pay, while the making of new ploughs is
considered as a pious work which can by no means be recompensed
in money, or by any other form of salary.

As the Kabyles already have private property, they evidently
have both rich and poor among them. But like all people who
closely live together, and know how poverty begins, they consider
it as an accident which may visit every one. "Don't say that you
will never wear the beggar's bag, nor go to prison," is a proverb
of the Russian peasants; the Kabyles practise it, and no
difference can be detected in the external behaviour between rich
and poor; when the poor convokes an "aid," the rich man works in
his field, just as the poor man does it reciprocally in his
turn.(34) Moreover, the djemmaas set aside certain gardens and
fields, sometimes cultivated in common, for the use of the
poorest members. Many like customs continue to exist. As the
poorer families would not be able to buy meat, meat is regularly
bought with the money of the fines, or the gifts to the djemmaa,
or the payments for the use of the communal olive-oil basins, and
it is distributed in equal parts among those who cannot afford
buying meat themselves. And when a sheep or a bullock is killed
by a family for its own use on a day which is not a market day,
the fact is announced in the streets by the village crier, in
order that sick people and pregnant women may take of it what
they want. Mutual support permeates the life of the Kabyles, and
if one of them, during a journey abroad, meets with another
Kabyle in need, he is bound to come to his aid, even at the risk
of his own fortune and life; if this has not been done, the
djemmaa of the man who has suffered from such neglect may lodge a
complaint, and the djemmaa of the selfish man will at once make
good the loss. We thus come across a custom which is familiar to
the students of the mediaeval merchant guilds. Every stranger who
enters a Kabyle village has right to housing in the winter, and
his horses can always graze on the communal lands for twenty-four
hours. But in case of need he can reckon upon an almost unlimited
support. Thus, during the famine of 1867-68, the Kabyles received
and fed every one who sought refuge in their villages, without
distinction of origin. In the district of Dellys, no less than
12,000 people who came from all parts of Algeria, and even from
Morocco, were fed in this way. While people died from starvation
all over Algeria, there was not one single case of death due to
this cause on Kabylian soil. The djemmaas, depriving themselves
of necessaries, organized relief, without ever asking any aid
from the Government, or uttering the slightest complaint; they
considered it as a natural duty. And while among the European
settlers all kind of police measures were taken to prevent thefts
and disorder resulting from such an influx of strangers, nothing
of the kind was required on the Kabyles' territory: the djemmaas
needed neither aid nor protection from without.(35)

I can only cursorily mention two other most interesting
features of Kabyle life; namely, the anaya, or protection granted
to wells, canals, mosques, marketplaces, some roads, and so on,
in case of war, and the cofs. In the anaya we have a series of
institutions both for diminishing the evils of war and for
preventing conflicts. Thus the market-place is anaya, especially
if it stands on a frontier and brings Kabyles and strangers
together; no one dares disturb peace in the market, and if a
disturbance arises, it is quelled at once by the strangers who
have gathered in the market town. The road upon which the women
go from the village to the fountain also is anaya in case of war;
and so on. As to the cof it is a widely spread form of
association, having some characters of the mediaeval Burgschaften
or Gegilden, as well as of societies both for mutual protection
and for various purposes--intellectual, political, and
emotional--which cannot be satisfied by the territorial
organization of the village, the clan, and the con federation.
The cof knows no territorial limits; it recruits its members in
various villages, even among strangers; and it protects them in
all possible eventualities of life. Altogether, it is an attempt
at supplementing the territorial grouping by an extra-territorial
grouping intended to give an expression to mutual affinities of
all kinds across the frontiers. The free international
association of individual tastes and ideas, which we consider as
one of the best features of our own life, has thus its origin in
barbarian antiquity.

The mountaineers of Caucasia offer another extremely
instructive field for illustrations of the same kind. In studying
the present customs of the Ossetes--their joint families and
communes and their judiciary conceptions--Professor Kovalevsky,
in a remarkable work on Modern Custom and Ancient Law was enabled
step by step to trace the similar dispositions of the old
barbarian codes and even to study the origins of feudalism. With
other Caucasian stems we occasionally catch a glimpse into the
origin of the village community in those cases where it was not
tribal but originated from a voluntary union between families of
distinct origin. Such was recently the case with some Khevsoure
villages, the inhabitants of which took the oath of "community
and fraternity."(36) In another part of Caucasus, Daghestan, we
see the growth of feudal relations between two tribes, both
maintaining at the same time their village communities (and even
traces of the gentile "classes"), and thus giving a living
illustration of the forms taken by the conquest of Italy and Gaul
by the barbarians. The victorious race, the Lezghines, who have
conquered several Georgian and Tartar villages in the Zakataly
district, did not bring them under the dominion of separate
families; they constituted a feudal clan which now includes
12,000 households in three villages, and owns in common no less
than twenty Georgian and Tartar villages. The conquerors divided
their own land among their clans, and the clans divided it in
equal parts among the families; but they did not interfere with
the djemmaas of their tributaries which still practise the habit
mentioned by Julius Caesar; namely, the djemmaa decides each year
which part of the communal territory must be cultivated, and this
land is divided into as many parts as there are families, and the
parts are distributed by lot. It is worthy of note that although
proletarians are of common occurrence among the Lezghines (who
live under a system of private property in land, and common
ownership of serfs(37)) they are rare among their Georgian
serfs, who continue to hold their land in common. As to the
customary law of the Caucasian mountaineers, it is much the same
as that of the Longobards or Salic Franks, and several of its
dispositions explain a good deal the judicial procedure of the
barbarians of old. Being of a very impressionable character, they
do their best to prevent quarrels from taking a fatal issue; so,
with the Khevsoures, the swords are very soon drawn when a
quarrel breaks out; but if a woman rushes out and throws among
them the piece of linen which she wears on her head, the swords
are at once returned to their sheaths, and the quarrel is
appeased. The head-dress of the women is anaya. If a quarrel has
not been stopped in time and has ended in murder, the
compensation money is so considerable that the aggressor is
entirely ruined for his life, unless he is adopted by the wronged
family; and if he has resorted to his sword in a trifling quarrel
and has inflicted wounds, he loses for ever the consideration of
his kin. In all disputes, mediators take the matter in hand; they
select from among the members of the clan the judges--six in
smaller affairs, and from ten to fifteen in more serious matters--
and Russian observers testify to the absolute incorruptibility
of the judges. An oath has such a significance that men enjoying
general esteem are dispensed from taking it: a simple affirmation
is quite sufficient, the more so as in grave affairs the
Khevsoure never hesitates to recognize his guilt (I mean, of
course, the Khevsoure untouched yet by civilization). The oath is
chiefly reserved for such cases, like disputes about property,
which require some sort of appreciation in addition to a simple
statement of facts; and in such cases the men whose affirmation
will decide in the dispute, act with the greatest circumspection.
Altogether it is certainly not a want of honesty or of respect to
the rights of the congeners which characterizes the barbarian
societies of Caucasus.

The stems of Africa offer such an immense variety of
extremely interesting societies standing at all intermediate
stages from the early village community to the despotic barbarian
monarchies that I must abandon the idea of giving here even the
chief results of a comparative study of their institutions.(38)
Suffice it to say, that, even under the most horrid despotism of
kings, the folkmotes of the village communities and their
customary law remain sovereign in a wide circle of affairs. The
law of the State allows the king to take any one's life for a
simple caprice, or even for simply satisfying his gluttony; but
the customary law of the people continues to maintain the same
network of institutions for mutual support which exist among
other barbarians or have existed among our ancestors. And with
some better-favoured stems (in Bornu, Uganda, Abyssinia), and
especially the Bogos, some of the dispositions of the customary
law are inspired with really graceful and delicate feelings.

The village communities of the natives of both Americas have
the same character. The Tupi of Brazil were found living in "long
houses" occupied by whole clans which used to cultivate their
corn and manioc fields in common. The Arani, much more advanced
in civilization, used to cultivate their fields in common; so
also the Oucagas, who had learned under their system of primitive
communism and "long houses" to build good roads and to carry on a
variety of domestic industries,(39) not inferior to those of the
early medieval times in Europe. All of them were also living
under the same customary law of which we have given specimens on
the preceding pages. At another extremity of the world we find
the Malayan feudalism, but this feudalism has been powerless to
unroot the negaria, or village community, with its common
ownership of at least part of the land, and the redistribution of
land among the several negarias of the tribe.(40) With the
Alfurus of Minahasa we find the communal rotation of the crops;
with the Indian stem of the Wyandots we have the periodical
redistribution of land within the tribe, and the clan-culture of
the soil; and in all those parts of Sumatra where Moslem
institutions have not yet totally destroyed the old organization
we find the joint family (suka) and the village community (kota)
which maintains its right upon the land, even if part of it has
been cleared without its authorization.(41) But to say this, is
to say that all customs for mutual protection and prevention of
feuds and wars, which have been briefly indicated in the
preceding pages as characteristic of the village community, exist
as well. More than that: the more fully the communal possession
of land has been maintained, the better and the gentler are the
habits. De Stuers positively affirms that wherever the
institution of the village community has been less encroached
upon by the conquerors, the inequalities of fortunes are smaller,
and the very prescriptions of the lex talionis are less cruel;
while, on the contrary, wherever the village community has been
totally broken up, "the inhabitants suffer the most unbearable
oppression from their despotic rulers."(42) This is quite
natural. And when Waitz made the remark that those stems which
have maintained their tribal confederations stand on a higher
level of development and have a richer literature than those
stems which have forfeited the old bonds of union, he only
pointed out what might have been foretold in advance.

More illustrations would simply involve me in tedious
repetitions--so strikingly similar are the barbarian societies
under all climates and amidst all races. The same process of
evolution has been going on in mankind with a wonderful
similarity. When the clan organization, assailed as it was from
within by the separate family, and from without by the
dismemberment of the migrating clans and the necessity of taking
in strangers of different descent--the village community, based
upon a territorial conception, came into existence. This new
institution, which had naturally grown out of the preceding one--
the clan--permitted the barbarians to pass through a most
disturbed period of history without being broken into isolated
families which would have succumbed in the struggle for life. New
forms of culture developed under the new organization;
agriculture attained the stage which it hardly has surpassed
until now with the great number; the domestic industries reached
a high degree of perfection. The wilderness was conquered, it was
intersected by roads, dotted with swarms thrown off by the
mother-communities. Markets and fortified centres, as well as
places of public worship, were erected. The conceptions of a
wider union, extended to whole stems and to several stems of
various origin, were slowly elaborated. The old conceptions of
justice which were conceptions of mere revenge, slowly underwent
a deep modification--the idea of amends for the wrong done
taking the place of revenge. The customary law which still makes
the law of the daily life for two-thirds or more of mankind, was
elaborated under that organization, as well as a system of habits
intended to prevent the oppression of the masses by the
minorities whose powers grew in proportion to the growing
facilities for private accumulation of wealth. This was the new
form taken by the tendencies of the masses for mutual support.
And the progress--economical, intellectual, and moral--which
mankind accomplished under this new popular form of organization,
was so great that the States, when they were called later on into
existence, simply took possession, in the interest of the
minorities, of all the judicial, economical, and administrative
functions which the village community already had exercised in
the interest of all.

NOTES:

1. Numberless traces of post-pliocene lakes, now disappeared, are
found over Central, West, and North Asia. Shells of the same
species as those now found in the Caspian Sea are scattered over
the surface of the soil as far East as half-way to Lake Aral, and
are found in recent deposits as far north as Kazan. Traces of
Caspian Gulfs, formerly taken for old beds of the Amu, intersect
the Turcoman territory. Deduction must surely be made for
temporary, periodical oscillations. But with all that,
desiccation is evident, and it progresses at a formerly
unexpected speed. Even in the relatively wet parts of South-West
Siberia, the succession of reliable surveys, recently published
by Yadrintseff, shows that villages have grown up on what was,
eighty years ago, the bottom of one of the lakes of the Tchany
group; while the other lakes of the same group, which covered
hundreds of square miles some fifty years ago, are now mere
ponds. In short, the desiccation of North-West Asia goes on at a
rate which must be measured by centuries, instead of by the
geological units of time of which we formerly used to speak.

2. Whole civilizations had thus disappeared, as is proved now by
the remarkable discoveries in Mongolia on the Orkhon and in the
Lukchun depression (by Dmitri Clements).

3. If I follow the opinions of (to name modern specialists only)
Nasse, Kovalevsky, and Vinogradov, and not those of Mr. Seebohm
(Mr. Denman Ross can only be named for the sake of completeness),
it is not only because of the deep knowledge and concordance of
views of these three writers, but also on account of their
perfect knowledge of the village community altogether--a
knowledge the want of which is much felt in the otherwise
remarkable work of Mr. Seebohm. The same remark applies, in a
still higher degree, to the most elegant writings of Fustel de
Coulanges, whose opinions and passionate interpretations of old
texts are confined to himself.

4. The literature of the village community is so vast that but a
few works can be named. Those of Sir Henry Maine, Mr. Seebohm,
and Walter's Das alte Wallis (Bonn, 1859), are well-known popular
sources of information about Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. For
France, P. Viollet, Precis de l'histoire du droit francais. Droit
prive, 1886, and several of his monographs in Bibl. de l'Ecole
des Chartes; Babeau, Le Village sous l'ancien regime (the mir in
the eighteenth century), third edition, 1887; Bonnemere, Doniol,
etc. For Italy and Scandinavia, the chief works are named in
Laveleye's Primitive Property, German version by K. Bucher. For
the Finns, Rein's Forelasningar, i. 16; Koskinen, Finnische
Geschichte, 1874, and various monographs. For the Lives and
Coures, Prof. Lutchitzky in Severnyi Vestnil, 1891. For the
Teutons, besides the well-known works of Maurer, Sohm
(Altdeutsche Reichsund Gerichts-Verfassung), also Dahn
(Urzeit, Volkerwanderung, Langobardische Studien), Janssen, Wilh.
Arnold, etc. For India, besides H. Maine and the works he names,
Sir John Phear's Aryan Village. For Russia and South Slavonians,
see Kavelin, Posnikoff, Sokolovsky, Kovalevsky, Efimenko,
Ivanisheff, Klaus, etc. (copious bibliographical index up to 1880
in the Sbornik svedeniy ob obschinye of the Russ. Geog. Soc.).
For general conclusions, besides Laveleye's Propriete, Morgan's
Ancient Society, Lippert's Kulturgeschichte, Post, Dargun, etc.,
also the lectures of M. Kovalevsky (Tableau des origines et de
l'evolution de la famille et de la propriete, Stockholm, 1890).
Many special monographs ought to be mentioned; their titles may
be found in the excellent lists given by P. Viollet in Droit
prive and Droit public. For other races, see subsequent notes.

5. Several authorities are inclined to consider the joint
household as an intermediate stage between the clan and the
village community; and there is no doubt that in very many cases
village communities have grown up out of undivided families.
Nevertheless, I consider the joint household as a fact of a
different order. We find it within the gentes; on the other hand,
we cannot affirm that joint families have existed at any period
without belonging either to a gens or to a village community, or
to a Gau. I conceive the early village communities as slowly
originating directly from the gentes, and consisting, according
to racial and local circumstances, either of several joint
families, or of both joint and simple families, or (especially in
the case of new settlements) of simple families only. If this
view be correct, we should not have the right of establishing the
series: gens, compound family, village community--the second
member of the series having not the same ethnological value as
the two others. See Appendix IX.

6. Stobbe, Beitrag zur Geschichte des deutschen Rechtes, p. 62.

7. The few traces of private property in land which are met with
in the early barbarian period are found with such stems (the
Batavians, the Franks in Gaul) as have been for a time under the
influence of Imperial Rome. See Inama-Sternegg's Die Ausbildung
der grossen Grundherrschaften in Deutschland, Bd. i. 1878. Also,
Besseler, Neubruch nach dem alteren deutschen Recht, pp. 11-12,
quoted by Kovalevsky, Modern Custom and Ancient Law, Moscow,
1886, i. 134.

8. Maurer's Markgenossenschaft; Lamprecht's "Wirthschaft und
Recht der Franken zur Zeit der Volksrechte," in Histor.
Taschenbuch, 1883; Seebohm's The English Village Community, ch.
vi, vii, and ix.

9. Letourneau, in Bulletin de la Soc. d'Anthropologie, 1888, vol.
xi. p. 476.

10. Walter, Das alte Wallis, p. 323; Dm. Bakradze and N.
Khoudadoff in Russian Zapiski of the Caucasian Geogr. Society,
xiv. Part I.

11. Bancroft's Native Races; Waitz, Anthropologie, iii. 423;
Montrozier, in Bull. Soc. d'Anthropologie, 1870; Post's Studien,
etc.

12. A number of works, by Ory, Luro, Laudes, and Sylvestre, on
the village community in Annam, proving that it has had there the
same forms as in Germany or Russia, is mentioned in a review of
these works by Jobbe-Duval, in Nouvelle Revue historique de droit
francais et etranger, October and December, 1896. A good study of
the village community of Peru, before the establishment of the
power of the Incas, has been brought out by Heinrich Cunow (Die
Soziale Verfassung des Inka-Reichs, Stuttgart, 1896.) The communal
possession of land and communal culture are described in that
work.

13. Kovalevsky, Modern Custom and Ancient Law, i. 115.

14. Palfrey, History of New England, ii. 13; quoted in Maine's
Village Communities, New York, 1876, p. 201.

15. Konigswarter, Etudes sur le developpement des societes
humaines, Paris, 1850.

16. This is, at least, the law of the Kalmucks, whose customary
law bears the closest resemblance to the laws of the Teutons, the
old Slavonians, etc.

17. The habit is in force still with many African and other
tribes.

18. Village Communities, pp. 65-68 and 199.

19. Maurer (Gesch. der Markverfassung, sections 29, 97) is quite
decisive upon this subject. He maintains that "All members of the
community... the laic and clerical lords as well, often also the
partial co-possessors (Markberechtigte), and even strangers to
the Mark, were submitted to its jurisdiction" (p. 312). This
conception remained locally in force up to the fifteenth century.

20. Konigswarter, loc. cit. p. 50; J. Thrupp, Historical Law
Tracts, London, 1843, p. 106.

21. Konigswarter has shown that the fred originated from an
offering which had to be made to appease the ancestors. Later on,
it was paid to the community, for the breach of peace; and still
later to the judge, or king, or lord, when they had appropriated
to themselves the rights of the community.

22. Post's Bausteine and Afrikanische Jurisprudenz, Oldenburg,
1887, vol. i. pp. 64 seq.; Kovalevsky, loc. cit. ii. 164-189.

23. O. Miller and M. Kovalevsky, "In the Mountaineer Communities
of Kabardia," in Vestnik Evropy, April, 1884. With the
Shakhsevens of the Mugan Steppe, blood feuds always end by
marriage between the two hostile sides (Markoff, in appendix to
the Zapiski of the Caucasian Geogr. Soc. xiv. 1, 21).

24. Post, in Afrik. Jurisprudenz, gives a series of facts
illustrating the conceptions of equity inrooted among the African
barbarians. The same may be said of all serious examinations into
barbarian common law.

25. See the excellent chapter, "Le droit de La Vieille Irlande,"
(also "Le Haut Nord") in Etudes de droit international et de
droit politique, by Prof. E. Nys, Bruxelles, 1896.

26. Introduction, p. xxxv.

27. Das alte Wallis, pp. 343-350.

28. Maynoff, "Sketches of the Judicial Practices of the
Mordovians," in the ethnographical Zapiski of the Russian
Geographical Society, 1885, pp. 236, 257.

29. Henry Maine, International Law, London, 1888, pp. 11-13. E.
Nys, Les origines du droit international, Bruxelles, 1894.

30. A Russian historian, the Kazan Professor Schapoff, who was
exiled in 1862 to Siberia, has given a good description of their
institutions in the Izvestia of the East-Siberian Geographical
Society, vol. v. 1874.

31. Sir Henry Maine's Village Communities, New York, 1876, pp.
193-196.

32. Nazaroff, The North Usuri Territory (Russian), St.
Petersburg, 1887, p. 65.

33. Hanoteau et Letourneux, La Kabylie, 3 vols. Paris, 1883.

34. To convoke an "aid" or "bee," some kind of meal must be
offered to the community. I am told by a Caucasian friend that in
Georgia, when the poor man wants an "aid," he borrows from the
rich man a sheep or two to prepare the meal, and the community
bring, in addition to their work, so many provisions that he may
repay the debt. A similar habit exists with the Mordovians.

35. Hanoteau et Letourneux, La kabylie, ii. 58. The same respect
to strangers is the rule with the Mongols. The Mongol who has
refused his roof to a stranger pays the full blood-compensation
if the stranger has suffered therefrom (Bastian, Der Mensch in
der Geschichte, iii. 231).

36. N. Khoudadoff, "Notes on the Khevsoures," in Zapiski of the
Caucasian Geogr. Society, xiv. 1, Tiflis, 1890, p. 68. They also
took the oath of not marrying girls from their own union, thus
displaying a remarkable return to the old gentile rules.

37. Dm. Bakradze, "Notes on the Zakataly District," in same
Zapiski, xiv. 1, p. 264. The "joint team" is as common among the
Lezghines as it is among the Ossetes.

38. See Post, Afrikanische Jurisprudenz, Oldenburg, 1887.
Munzinger, Ueber das Recht und Sitten der Bogos, Winterthur
1859; Casalis, Les Bassoutos, Paris, 1859; Maclean, Kafir Laws
and Customs, Mount Coke, 1858, etc.

39. Waitz, iii. 423 seq.

40. Post's Studien zur Entwicklungsgeschichte des Familien Rechts
Oldenburg, 1889, pp. 270 seq.

41. Powell, Annual Report of the Bureau of Ethnography,
Washington, 1881, quoted in Post's Studien, p. 290; Bastian's
Inselgruppen in Oceanien, 1883, p. 88.

42. De Stuers, quoted by Waitz, v. 141.






CHAPTER V

MUTUAL AID IN THE MEDIAEVAL CITY

Growth of authority in Barbarian Society. Serfdom in the
villages. Revolt of fortified towns: their liberation; their
charts. The guild. Double origin of the free medieval city.
Self-jurisdiction, self-administration. Honourable position
of labour. Trade by the guild and by the city.





Sociability and need of mutual aid and support are such
inherent parts of human nature that at no time of history can we
discover men living in small isolated families, fighting each
other for the means of subsistence. On the contrary, modern
research, as we saw it in the two preceding chapters, proves that
since the very beginning of their prehistoric life men used to
agglomerate into gentes, clans, or tribes, maintained by an idea
of common descent and by worship of common ancestors. For
thousands and thousands of years this organization has kept men
together, even though there was no authority whatever to impose
it. It has deeply impressed all subsequent development of
mankind; and when the bonds of common descent had been loosened
by migrations on a grand scale, while the development of the
separated family within the clan itself had destroyed the old
unity of the clan, a new form of union, territorial in its
principle--the village community--was called into existence
by the social genius of man. This institution, again, kept men
together for a number of centuries, permitting them to further
develop their social institutions and to pass through some of the
darkest periods of history, without being dissolved into loose
aggregations of families and individuals, to make a further step
in their evolution, and to work out a number of secondary social
institutions, several of which have survived down to the present
time. We have now to follow the further developments of the same
ever-living tendency for mutual aid. Taking the village
communities of the so-called barbarians at a time when they were
making a new start of civilization after the fall of the Roman
Empire, we have to study the new aspects taken by the sociable
wants of the masses in the middle ages, and especially in the
medieval guilds and the medieval city.

Far from being the fighting animals they have often been
compared to, the barbarians of the first centuries of our era
(like so many Mongolians, Africans, Arabs, and so on, who still
continue in the same barbarian stage) invariably preferred peace
to war. With the exception of a few tribes which had been driven
during the great migrations into unproductive deserts or
highlands, and were thus compelled periodically to prey upon
their better-favoured neighbours--apart from these, the great
bulk of the Teutons, the Saxons, the Celts, the Slavonians, and
so on, very soon after they had settled in their newly-conquered
abodes, reverted to the spade or to their herds. The earliest
barbarian codes already represent to us societies composed of
peaceful agricultural communities, not hordes of men at war with
each other. These barbarians covered the country with villages
and farmhouses;(1) they cleared the forests, bridged the
torrents, and colonized the formerly quite uninhabited
wilderness; and they left the uncertain warlike pursuits to
brotherhoods, scholae, or "trusts" of unruly men, gathered round
temporary chieftains, who wandered about, offering their
adventurous spirit, their arms, and their knowledge of warfare
for the protection of populations, only too anxious to be left in
peace. The warrior bands came and went, prosecuting their family
feuds; but the great mass continued to till the soil, taking but
little notice of their would-be rulers, so long as they did not
interfere with the independence of their village communities.(2)
The new occupiers of Europe evolved the systems of land tenure
and soil culture which are still in force with hundreds of
millions of men; they worked out their systems of compensation
for wrongs, instead of the old tribal blood-revenge; they learned
the first rudiments of industry; and while they fortified their
villages with palisaded walls, or erected towers and earthen
forts whereto to repair in case of a new invasion, they soon
abandoned the task of defending these towers and forts to those
who made of war a speciality.

The very peacefulness of the barbarians, certainly not their
supposed warlike instincts, thus became the source of their
subsequent subjection to the military chieftains. It is evident
that the very mode of life of the armed brotherhoods offered them
more facilities for enrichment than the tillers of the soil could
find in their agricultural communities. Even now we see that
armed men occasionally come together to shoot down Matabeles and
to rob them of their droves of cattle, though the Matabeles only
want peace and are ready to buy it at a high price. The scholae
of old certainly were not more scrupulous than the scholae of our
own time. Droves of cattle, iron (which was extremely costly at
that time(3)), and slaves were appropriated in this way; and
although most acquisitions were wasted on the spot in those
glorious feasts of which epic poetry has so much to say--still
some part of the robbed riches was used for further enrichment.
There was plenty of waste land, and no lack of men ready to till
it, if only they could obtain the necessary cattle and
implements. Whole villages, ruined by murrains, pests, fires, or
raids of new immigrants, were often abandoned by their
inhabitants, who went anywhere in search of new abodes. They
still do so in Russia in similar circumstances. And if one of the
hirdmen of the armed brotherhoods offered the peasants some
cattle for a fresh start, some iron to make a plough, if not the
plough itself, his protection from further raids, and a number of
years free from all obligations, before they should begin to
repay the contracted debt, they settled upon the land. And when,
after a hard fight with bad crops, inundations and pestilences,
those pioneers began to repay their debts, they fell into servile
obligations towards the protector of the territory. Wealth
undoubtedly did accumulate in this way, and power always follows
wealth.(4) And yet, the more we penetrate into the life of those
times, the sixth and seventh centuries of our era, the more we
see that another element, besides wealth and military force, was
required to constitute the authority of the few. It was an
element of law and tight, a desire of the masses to maintain
peace, and to establish what they considered to be justice, which
gave to the chieftains of the scholae--kings, dukes, knyazes,
and the like--the force they acquired two or three hundred
years later. That same idea of justice, conceived as an adequate
revenge for the wrong done, which had grown in the tribal stage,
now passed as a red thread through the history of subsequent
institutions, and, much more even than military or economic
causes, it became the basis upon which the authority of the kings
and the feudal lords was founded.

In fact, one of the chief preoccupations of the barbarian
village community always was, as it still is with our barbarian
contemporaries, to put a speedy end to the feuds which arose from
the then current conception of justice. When a quarrel took
place, the community at once interfered, and after the folkmote
had heard the case, it settled the amount of composition
(wergeld) to be paid to the wronged person, or to his family, as
well as the fred, or fine for breach of peace, which had to be
paid to the community. Interior quarrels were easily appeased in
this way. But when feuds broke out between two different tribes,
or two confederations of tribes, notwithstanding all measures
taken to prevent them,(5) the difficulty was to find an arbiter
or sentence-finder whose decision should be accepted by both
parties alike, both for his impartiality and for his knowledge of
the oldest law. The difficulty was the greater as the customary
laws of different tribes and confederations were at variance as
to the compensation due in different cases. It therefore became
habitual to take the sentence-finder from among such families, or
such tribes, as were reputed for keeping the law of old in its
purity; of being versed in the songs, triads, sagas, etc., by
means of which law was perpetuated in memory; and to retain law
in this way became a sort of art, a "mystery," carefully
transmitted in certain families from generation to generation.
Thus in Iceland, and in other Scandinavian lands, at every
Allthing, or national folkmote, a lovsogmathr used to recite the
whole law from memory for the enlightening of the assembly; and
in Ireland there was, as is known, a special class of men reputed
for the knowledge of the old traditions, and therefore enjoying a
great authority as judges.(6) Again, when we are told by the
Russian annals that some stems of North-West Russia, moved by the
growing disorder which resulted from "clans rising against
clans," appealed to Norman varingiar to be their judges and
commanders of warrior scholae; and when we see the knyazes, or
dukes, elected for the next two hundred years always from the
same Norman family, we cannot but recognize that the Slavonians
trusted to the Normans for a better knowledge of the law which
would be equally recognized as good by different Slavonian kins.
In this case the possession of runes, used for the transmission
of old customs, was a decided advantage in favour of the Normans;
but in other cases there are faint indications that the "eldest"
branch of the stem, the supposed motherbranch, was appealed to to
supply the judges, and its decisions were relied upon as
just;(7) while at a later  epoch we see a distinct tendency
towards taking the sentence-finders from the Christian clergy,
which, at that time, kept still to the fundamental, now
forgotten, principle of Christianity, that retaliation is no act
of justice. At that time the Christian clergy opened the churches
as places of asylum for those who fled from blood revenge, and
they willingly acted as arbiters in criminal cases, always
opposing the old tribal principle of life for life and wound for
wound. In short, the deeper we penetrate into the history of
early institutions, the less we find grounds for the military
theory of origin of authority. Even that power which later on
became such a source of oppression seems, on the contrary, to
have found its origin in the peaceful inclinations of the masses.

In all these cases the fred, which often amounted to half the
compensation, went to the folkmote, and from times immemorial it
used to be applied to works of common utility and defence. It has
still the same destination (the erection of towers) among the
Kabyles and certain Mongolian stems; and we have direct evidence
that even several centuries later the judicial fines, in Pskov
and several French and German cities, continued to be used for
the repair of the city walls.(8) It was thus quite natural that
the fines should be handed over to the sentence-finder, who was
bound, in return, both to maintain the schola of armed men to
whom the defence of the territory was trusted, and to execute the
sentences. This became a universal custom in the eighth and ninth
centuries, even when the sentence-finder was an elected bishop.
The germ of a combination of what we should now call the judicial
power and the executive thus made its appearance. But to these
two functions the attributions of the duke or king were strictly
limited. He was no ruler of the people--the supreme power still
belonging to the folkmote--not even a commander of the popular
militia; when the folk took to arms, it marched under a separate,
also elected, commander, who was not a subordinate, but an equal
to the king.(9) The king was a lord on his personal domain only.
In fact, in barbarian language, the word konung, koning, or
cyning synonymous with the Latin rex, had no other meaning than
that of a temporary leader or chieftain of a band of men. The
commander of a flotilla of boats, or even of a single pirate
boat, was also a konung, and till the present day the commander
of fishing in Norway is named Not-kong--"the king of the
nets."(10) The veneration attached later on to the personality
of a king did not yet exist, and while treason to the kin was
punished by death, the slaying of a king could be recouped by the
payment of compensation: a king simply was valued so much more
than a freeman.(11) And when King Knu (or Canute) had killed one
man of his own schola, the saga represents him convoking his
comrades to a thing where he stood on his knees imploring pardon.
He was pardoned, but not till he had agreed to pay nine times the
regular composition, of which one-third went to himself for the
loss of one of his men, one-third to the relatives of the slain
man, and one-third (the fred) to the schola.(12) In reality, a
complete change had to be accomplished in the current
conceptions, under the double influence of the Church and the
students of Roman law, before an idea of sanctity began to be
attached to the personality of the king.

However, it lies beyond the scope of these essays to follow
the gradual development of authority out of the elements just
indicated. Historians, such as Mr. and Mrs. Green for this
country, Augustin Thierry, Michelet, and Luchaire for France,
Kaufmann, Janssen, W. Arnold, and even Nitzsch, for Germany, Leo
and Botta for Italy, Byelaeff, Kostomaroff, and their followers
for Russia, and many others, have fully told that tale. They have
shown how populations, once free, and simply agreeing "to feed" a
certain portion of their military defenders, gradually became the
serfs of these protectors; how "commendation" to the Church, or
to a lord, became a hard necessity for the freeman; how each
lord's and bishop's castle became a robber's nest--how
feudalism was imposed, in a word--and how the crusades, by
freeing the serfs who wore the cross, gave the first impulse to
popular emancipation. All this need not be retold in this place,
our chief aim being to follow the constructive genius of the
masses in their mutual-aid institutions.

At a time when the last vestiges of barbarian freedom seemed
to disappear, and Europe, fallen under the dominion of thousands
of petty rulers, was marching towards the constitution of such
theocracies and despotic States as had followed the barbarian
stage during the previous starts of civilization, or of barbarian
monarchies, such as we see now in Africa, life in Europe took
another direction. It went on on lines similar to those it had
once taken in the cities of antique Greece. With a unanimity
which seems almost incomprehensible, and for a long time was not
understood by historians, the urban agglomerations, down to the
smallest burgs, began to shake off the yoke of their worldly and
clerical lords. The fortified village rose against the lord's
castle, defied it first, attacked it next, and finally destroyed
it. The movement spread from spot to spot, involving every town
on the surface of Europe, and in less than a hundred years free
cities had been called into existence on the coasts of the
Mediterranean, the North Sea, the Baltic, the Atlantic Ocean,
down to the fjords of Scandinavia; at the feet of the Apennines,
the Alps, the Black Forest, the Grampians, and the Carpathians;
in the plains of Russia, Hungary, France and Spain. Everywhere
the same revolt took place, with the same features, passing
through the same phases, leading to the same results. Wherever
men had found, or expected to find, some protection behind their
town walls, they instituted their "co-jurations," their
"fraternities," their "friendships," united in one common idea,
and boldly marching towards a new life of mutual support and
liberty. And they succeeded so well that in three or four hundred
years they had changed the very face of Europe. They had covered
the country with beautiful sumptuous buildings, expressing the
genius of free unions of free men, unrivalled since for their
beauty and expressiveness; and they bequeathed to the following
generations all the arts, all the industries, of which our
present civilization, with all its achievements and promises for
the future, is only a further development. And when we now look
to the forces which have produced these grand results, we find
them--not in the genius of individual heroes, not in the mighty
organization of huge States or the political capacities of their
rulers, but in the very same current of mutual aid and support
which we saw at work in the village community, and which was
vivified and reinforced in the Middle Ages by a new form of
unions, inspired by the very same spirit but shaped on a new
model--the guilds.

It is well known by this time that feudalism did not imply a
dissolution of the village community. Although the lord had
succeeded in imposing servile labour upon the peasants, and had
appropriated for himself such rights as were formerly vested in
the village community alone (taxes, mortmain, duties on
inheritances and marriages), the peasants had, nevertheless,
maintained the two fundamental rights of their communities: the
common possession of the land, and self-jurisdiction. In olden
times, when a king sent his vogt to a village, the peasants
received him with flowers in one hand and arms in the other, and
asked him--which law he intended to apply: the one he found in
the village, or the one he brought with him? And, in the first
case, they handed him the flowers and accepted him; while in the
second case they fought him.(13) Now, they accepted the king's
or the lord's official whom they could not refuse; but they
maintained the folkmote's jurisdiction, and themselves nominated
six, seven, or twelve judges, who acted with the lord's judge, in
the presence of the folkmote, as arbiters and sentence-finders.
In most cases the official had nothing left to him but to confirm
the sentence and to levy the customary fred. This precious right
of self-jurisdiction, which, at that time, meant
self-administration and self-legislation, had been maintained
through all the struggles; and even the lawyers by whom Karl the
Great was surrounded could not abolish it; they were bound to
confirm it. At the same time, in all matters concerning the
community's domain, the folkmote retained its supremacy and (as
shown by Maurer) often claimed submission from the lord himself
in land tenure matters. No growth of feudalism could break this
resistance; the village community kept its ground; and when, in
the ninth and tenth centuries, the invasions of the Normans, the
Arabs, and the Ugrians had demonstrated that military scholae
were of little value for protecting the land, a general movement
began all over Europe for fortifying the villages with stone
walls and citadels. Thousands of fortified centres were then
built by the energies of the village communities; and, once they
had built their walls, once a common interest had been created in
this new sanctuary--the town walls--they soon understood that
they could henceforward resist the encroachments of the inner
enemies, the lords, as well as the invasions of foreigners. A new
life of freedom began to develop within the fortified enclosures.
The medieval city was born.(14)

No period of history could better illustrate the constructive
powers of the popular masses than the tenth and eleventh
centuries, when the fortified villages and market-places,
representing so many "oases amidst the feudal forest," began to
free themselves from their lord's yoke, and slowly elaborated the
future city organization; but, unhappily, this is a period about
which historical information is especially scarce: we know the
results, but little has reached us about the means by which they
were achieved. Under the protection of their walls the cities'
folkmotes--either quite independent, or led by the chief noble
or merchant families--conquered and maintained the right of
electing the military defensor and supreme judge of the town, or
at least of choosing between those who pretended to occupy this
position. In Italy the young communes were continually sending
away their defensors or domini, fighting those who refused to go.
The same went on in the East. In Bohemia, rich and poor alike
(Bohemicae gentis magni et parvi, nobiles et ignobiles) took part
in the election;(15) while, the vyeches (folkmotes) of the
Russian cities regularly elected their dukes--always from the
same Rurik family--covenanted with them, and sent the knyaz
away if he had provoked discontent.(16) At the same time in most
cities of Western and Southern Europe, the tendency was to take
for defensor a bishop whom the city had elected itself. and so
many bishops took the lead in protecting the "immunities" of the
towns and in defending their liberties, that numbers of them were
considered, after their death, as saints and special patrons of
different cities. St. Uthelred of Winchester, St. Ulrik of
Augsburg, St. Wolfgang of Ratisbon, St. Heribert of Cologne, St.
Adalbert of Prague, and so on, as well as many abbots and monks,
became so many cities' saints for having acted in defence of
popular rights.(17) And under the new defensors, whether laic or
clerical, the citizens conquered full self-jurisdiction and
self-administration for their folkmotes.(18)

The whole process of liberation progressed by a series of
imperceptible acts of devotion to the common cause, accomplished
by men who came out of the masses--by unknown heroes whose very
names have not been preserved by history. The wonderful movement
of the God's peace (treuga Dei) by which the popular masses
endeavoured to put a limit to the endless family feuds of the
noble families, was born in the young towns, the bishops and the
citizens trying to extend to the nobles the peace they had
established within their town walls.(19) Already at that period,
the commercial cities of Italy, and especially Amalfi (which had
its elected consuls since 844, and frequently changed its doges
in the tenth century)(20) worked out the customary maritime and
commercial law which later on became a model for all Europe;
Ravenna elaborated its craft organization, and Milan, which had
made its first revolution in 980, became a great centre of
commerce, its trades enjoying a full independence since the
eleventh century.(21) So also Brugge and Ghent; so also several
cities of France in which the Mahl or forum had become a quite
independent institution.(22) And already during that period
began the work of artistic decoration of the towns by works of
architecture, which we still admire and which loudly testify of
the intellectual movement of the times. "The basilicae were then
renewed in almost all the universe," Raoul Glaber wrote in his
chronicle, and some of the finest monuments of medieval
architecture date from that period: the wonderful old church of
Bremen was built in the ninth century, Saint Marc of Venice was
finished in 1071, and the beautiful dome of Pisa in 1063. In
fact, the intellectual movement which has been described as the
Twelfth Century Renaissance(23) and the Twelfth Century
Rationalism--the precursor of the Reform(24) date from that
period, when most cities were still simple agglomerations of
small village communities enclosed by walls.

However, another element, besides the village-community
principle, was required to give to these growing centres of
liberty and enlightenment the unity of thought and action, and
the powers of initiative, which made their force in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries. With the growing diversity of
occupations, crafts and arts, and with the growing commerce in
distant lands, some new form of union was required, and this
necessary new element was supplied by the guilds. Volumes and
volumes have been written about these unions which, under the
name of guilds, brotherhoods, friendships and druzhestva, minne,
artels in Russia, esnaifs in Servia and Turkey, amkari in
Georgia, and so on, took such a formidable development in
medieval times and played such an important part in the
emancipation of the cities. But it took historians more than
sixty years before the universality of this institution and its
true characters were understood. Only now, when hundreds of guild
statutes have been published and studied, and their relationship
to the Roman collegiae, and the earlier unions in Greece and in
India,(25) is known, can we maintain with full confidence that
these brotherhoods were but a further development of the same
principles which we saw at work in the gens and the village
community.

Nothing illustrates better these medieval brother hoods than
those temporary guilds which were formed on board ships. When a
ship of the Hansa had accomplished her first half-day passage
after having left the port, the captain (Schiffer) gathered all
crew and passengers on the deck, and held the following language,
as reported by a contemporary:--

"'As we are now at the mercy of God and the waves,' he said,
'each one must be equal to each other. And as we are surrounded
by storms, high waves, pirates and other dangers, we must keep a
strict order that we may bring our voyage to a good end. That is
why we shall pronounce the prayer for a good wind and good
success, and, according to marine law, we shall name the
occupiers of the judges' seats (Schoffenstellen).' Thereupon the
crew elected a Vogt and four scabini, to act as their judges. At
the end of the voyage the Vogt and the scabini. abdicated their
functions and addressed the. 'What has happened on board ship, we
crew as follows:--must pardon to each other and consider as
dead (todt und ab sein lassen). What we have judged right, was
for the sake of justice. This is why we beg you all, in the name
of honest justice, to forget all the animosity one may nourish
against another, and to swear on bread and salt that he will not
think of it in a bad spirit. If any one, however, considers
himself wronged, he must appeal to the land Vogt and ask justice
from him before sunset.' On landing, the Stock with the fredfines
was handed over to the Vogt of the sea-port for distribution
among the poor."(26)

This simple narrative, perhaps better than anything else,
depicts the spirit of the medieval guilds. Like organizations
came into existence wherever a group of men--fishermen,
hunters, travelling merchants, builders, or settled craftsmen--
came together for a common pursuit. Thus, there was on board ship
the naval authority of the captain; but, for the very success of
the common enterprise, all men on board, rich and poor, masters
and crew, captain and sailors, agreed to be equals in their
mutual relations, to be simply men, bound to aid each other and
to settle their possible disputes before judges elected by all of
them. So also when a number of craftsmen--masons, carpenters,
stone-cutters, etc.--came together for building, say, a
cathedral, they all belonged to a city which had its political
organization, and each of them belonged moreover to his own
craft; but they were united besides by their common enterprise,
which they knew better than any one else, and they joined into a
body united by closer, although temporary, bonds; they founded
the guild for the building of the cathedral.(27) We may see the
same till now in the Kabylian. cof:(28) the Kabyles have their
village community; but this union is not sufficient for all
political, commercial, and personal needs of union, and the
closer brotherhood of the cof is constituted.

As to the social characters of the medieval guild, any
guild-statute may illustrate them. Taking, for instance, the
skraa of some early Danish guild, we read in it, first, a
statement of the general brotherly feelings which must reign in
the guild; next come the regulations relative to
self-jurisdiction in cases of quarrels arising between two
brothers, or a brother and a stranger; and then, the social
duties of the brethren are enumerated. If a brother's house is
burned, or he has lost his ship, or has suffered on a pilgrim's
voyage, all the brethren must come to his aid. If a brother falls
dangerously ill, two brethren must keep watch by his bed till he
is out of danger, and if he dies, the brethren must bury him--a
great affair in those times of pestilences--and follow him to
the church and the grave. After his death they must provide for
his children, if necessary; very often the widow becomes a sister
to the guild.(29)

These two leading features appeared in every brotherhood
formed for any possible purpose. In each case the members treated
each other as, and named each other, brother and sister;(30) all
were equals before the guild. They owned some "chattel" (cattle,
land, buildings, places of worship, or "stock") in common. All
brothers took the oath of abandoning all feuds of old; and,
without imposing upon each other the obligation of never
quarrelling again, they agreed that no quarrel should degenerate
into a feud, or into a law-suit before another court than the
tribunal of the brothers themselves. And if a brother was
involved in a quarrel with a stranger to the guild, they agreed
to support him for bad and for good; that is, whether he was
unjustly accused of aggression, or really was the aggressor, they
had to support him, and to bring things to a peaceful end. So
long as his was not a secret aggression--in which case he would
have been treated as an outlaw--the brotherhood stood by
him.(31) If the relatives of the wronged man wanted to revenge
the offence at once by a new aggression, the brother-hood
supplied him with a horse to run away, or with a boat, a pair of
oars, a knife and a steel for striking light; if he remained in
town, twelve brothers accompanied him to protect him; and in the
meantime they arranged the composition. They went to court to
support by oath the truthfulness of his statements, and if he was
found guilty they did not let him go to full ruin and become a
slave through not paying the due compensation: they all paid it,
just as the gens did in olden times. Only when a brother had
broken the faith towards his guild-brethren, or other people, he
was excluded from the brotherhood "with a Nothing's name" (tha
scal han maeles af brodrescap met nidings nafn).(32)

Such were the leading ideas of those brotherhoods which
gradually covered the whole of medieval life. In fact, we know of
guilds among all possible professions: guilds of serfs,(33)
guilds of freemen, and guilds of both serfs and freemen; guilds
called into life for the special purpose of hunting, fishing, or
a trading expedition, and dissolved when the special purpose had
been achieved; and guilds lasting for centuries in a given craft
or trade. And, in proportion as life took an always greater
variety of pursuits, the variety in the guilds grew in
proportion. So we see not only merchants, craftsmen, hunters, and
peasants united in guilds; we also see guilds of priests,
painters, teachers of primary schools and universities, guilds
for performing the passion play, for building a church, for
developing the "mystery" of a given school of art or craft, or
for a special recreation--even guilds among beggars,
executioners, and lost women, all organized on the same double
principle of self-jurisdiction and mutual support.(34) For
Russia we have positive evidence showing that the very "making of
Russia" was as much the work of its hunters', fishermen's, and
traders' artels as of the budding village communities, and up to
the present day the country is covered with artels.(35)

These few remarks show how incorrect was the view taken by
some early explorers of the guilds when they wanted to see the
essence of the institution in its yearly festival. In reality,
the day of the common meal was always the day, or the morrow of
the day, of election of aldermen, of discussion of alterations in
the statutes, and very often the day of judgment of quarrels that
had risen among the brethren,(36) or of renewed allegiance to
the guild. The common meal, like the festival at the old tribal
folkmote--the mahl or malum--or the Buryate aba, or the
parish feast and the harvest supper, was simply an affirmation of
brotherhood. It symbolized the times when everything was kept in
common by the clan. This day, at least, all belonged to all; all
sate at the same table and partook of the same meal. Even at a
much later time the inmate of the almshouse of a London guild sat
this day by the side of the rich alderman. As to the distinction
which several explorers have tried to establish between the old
Saxon "frith guild" and the so-called "social" or "religious"
guilds--all were frith guilds in the sense above
mentioned,(37) and all were religious in the sense in which a
village community or a city placed under the protection of a
special saint is social and religious. If the institution of the
guild has taken such an immense extension in Asia, Africa, and
Europe, if it has lived thousands of years, reappearing again and
again when similar conditions called it into existence, it is
because it was much more than an eating association, or an
association for going to church on a certain day, or a burial
club. It answered to a deeply inrooted want of human nature; and
it embodied all the attributes which the State appropriated later
on for its bureaucracy and police, and much more than that. It
was an association for mutual support in all circumstances and in
all accidents of life, "by deed and advise," and it was an
organization for maintaining justice--with this difference from
the State, that on all these occasions a humane, a brotherly
element was introduced instead of the formal element which is the
essential characteristic of State interference. Even when
appearing before the guild tribunal, the guild-brother answered
before men who knew him well and had stood by him before in their
daily work, at the common meal, in the performance of their
brotherly duties: men who were his equals and brethren indeed,
not theorists of law nor defenders of some one else's
interests.(38)

It is evident that an institution so well suited to serve the
need of union, without depriving the individual of his
initiative, could but spread, grow, and fortify. The difficulty
was only to find such form as would permit to federate the unions
of the guilds without interfering with the unions of the village
communities, and to federate all these into one harmonious whole.
And when this form of combination had been found, and a series of
favourable circumstances permitted the cities to affirm their
independence, they did so with a unity of thought which can but
excite our admiration, even in our century of railways,
telegraphs, and printing. Hundreds of charters in which the
cities inscribed their liberation have reached us, and through
all of them--notwithstanding the infinite variety of details,
which depended upon the more or less greater fulness of
emancipation--the same leading ideas run. The city organized
itself as a federation of both small village communities and
guilds.

"All those who belong to the friendship of the town"--so
runs a charter given in 1188 to the burghesses of Aire by Philip,
Count of Flanders--"have promised and confirmed by faith and
oath that they will aid each other as brethren, in whatever is
useful and honest. That if one commits against another an offence
in words or in deeds, the one who has suffered there from will
not take revenge, either himself or his people... he will lodge a
complaint and the offender will make good for his offence,
according to what will be pronounced by twelve elected judges
acting as arbiters, And if the offender or the offended, after
having been warned thrice, does not submit to the decision of the
arbiters, he will be excluded from the friendship as a wicked man
and a perjuror.(39)

"Each one of the men of the commune will be faithful to his
con-juror, and will give him aid and advice, according to what
justice will dictate him"--the Amiens and Abbeville charters
say. "All will aid each other, according to their powers, within
the boundaries of the Commune, and will not suffer that any one
takes anything from any one of them, or makes one pay
contributions"--do we read in the charters of Soissons,
Compiegne, Senlis, and many others of the same type.(40) And so
on with countless variations on the same theme.

"The Commune," Guilbert de Nogent wrote, "is an oath of
mutual aid (mutui adjutorii conjuratio)... A new and detestable
word. Through it the serfs (capite sensi) are freed from all
serfdom; through it, they can only be condemned to a legally
determined fine for breaches of the law; through it, they cease
to be liable to payments which the serfs always used to
pay."(41)

The same wave of emancipation ran, in the twelfth century,
through all parts of the continent, involving both rich cities
and the poorest towns. And if we may say that, as a rule, the
Italian cities were the first to free themselves, we can assign
no centre from which the movement would have spread. Very often a
small burg in central Europe took the lead for its region, and
big agglomerations accepted the little town's charter as a model
for their own. Thus, the charter of a small town, Lorris, was
adopted by eighty-three towns in south-west France, and that of
Beaumont became the model for over five hundred towns and cities
in Belgium and France. Special deputies were dispatched by the
cities to their neighbours to obtain a copy from their charter,
and the constitution was framed upon that model. However, they
did not simply copy each other: they framed their own charters in
accordance with the concessions they had obtained from their
lords; and the result was that, as remarked by an historian, the
charters of the medieval communes offer the same variety as the
Gothic architecture of their churches and cathedrals. The same
leading ideas in all of them--the cathedral symbolizing the
union of parish and guild in the, city--and the same infinitely
rich variety of detail.

Self-jurisdiction was the essential point, and
self-jurisdiction meant self-administration. But the commune was
not simply an "autonomous" part of the State--such ambiguous
words had not yet been invented by that time--it was a State in
itself. It had the right of war and peace, of federation and
alliance with its neighbours. It was sovereign in its own
affairs, and mixed with no others. The supreme political power
could be vested entirely in a democratic forum, as was the case
in Pskov, whose vyeche sent and received ambassadors, concluded
treaties, accepted and sent away princes, or went on without them
for dozens of years; or it was vested in, or usurped by, an
aristocracy of merchants or even nobles, as was the case in
hundreds of Italian and middle European cities. The principle,
nevertheless, remained the same: the city was a State and--what
was perhaps still more remarkable--when the power in the city
was usurped by an aristocracy of merchants or even nobles, the
inner life of the city and the democratism of its daily life did
not disappear: they depended but little upon what may be called
the political form of the State.

The secret of this seeming anomaly lies in the fact that a
medieval city was not a centralized State. During the first
centuries of its existence, the city hardly could be named a
State as regards its interior organization, because the middle
ages knew no more of the present centralization of functions than
of the present territorial centralization. Each group had its
share of sovereignty. The city was usually divided into four
quarters, or into five to seven sections radiating from a centre,
each quarter or section roughly corresponding to a certain trade
or profession which prevailed in it, but nevertheless containing
inhabitants of different social positions and occupations--
nobles, merchants, artisans, or even half-serfs; and each section
or quarter constituted a quite independent agglomeration. In
Venice, each island was an independent political community. It
had its own organized trades, its own commerce in salt, its own
jurisdiction and administration, its own forum; and the
nomination of a doge by the city changed nothing in the inner
independence of the units.(42) In Cologne, we see the
inhabitants divided into Geburschaften and Heimschaften
(viciniae), i.e. neighbour guilds, which dated from the
Franconian period. Each of them had its judge (Burrichter) and
the usual twelve elected sentence-finders (Schoffen), its Vogt,
and its greve or commander of the local militia.(43) The story
of early London before the Conquest--Mr. Green says--is that
"of a number of little groups scattered here and there over the
area within the walls, each growing up with its own life and
institutions, guilds, sokes, religious houses and the like, and
only slowly drawing together into a municipal union."(44) And if
we refer to the annals of the Russian cities, Novgorod and Pskov,
both of which are relatively rich in local details, we find the
section (konets) consisting of independent streets (ulitsa), each
of which, though chiefly peopled with artisans of a certain
craft, had also merchants and landowners among its inhabitants,
and was a separate community. It had the communal responsibility
of all members in case of crime, its own jurisdiction and
administration by street aldermen (ulichanskiye starosty), its
own seal and, in case of need, its own forum; its own militia, as
also its self-elected priests and its, own collective life and
collective enterprise.(45)

The medieval city thus appears as a double federation: of all
householders united into small territorial unions--the street,
the parish, the section--and of individuals united by oath into
guilds according to their professions; the former being a produce
of the village-community origin of the city, while the second is
a subsequent growth called to life by new conditions.

To guarantee liberty, self-administration, and peace was the
chief aim of the medieval city. and labour, as we shall presently
see when speaking of the craft guilds, was its chief foundation.
But "production" did not absorb the whole attention of the
medieval economist. With his practical mind, he understood that
"consumption" must be guaranteed in order to obtain production;
and therefore, to provide for "the common first food and lodging
of poor and rich alike" (gemeine notdurft und gemach armer und
richer(46)) was the fundamental principle in each city. The
purchase of food supplies and other first necessaries (coal,
wood, etc.) before they had reached the market, or altogether in
especially favourable conditions from which others would be
excluded--the preempcio, in a word--was entirely prohibited.
Everything had to go to the market and be offered there for every
one's purchase, till the ringing of the bell had closed the
market. Then only could the retailer buy the remainder, and even
then his profit should be an "honest profit" only.(47) Moreover,
when corn was bought by a baker wholesale after the close of the
market, every citizen had the right to claim part of the corn
(about half-a-quarter) for his own use, at wholesale price, if he
did so before the final conclusion of the bargain; and
reciprocally, every baker could claim the same if the citizen
purchased corn for re-selling it. In the first case, the corn had
only to be brought to the town mill to be ground in its proper
turn for a settled price, and the bread could be baked in the
four banal, or communal oven.(48) In short, if a scarcity
visited the city, all had to suffer from it more or less; but
apart from the calamities, so long as the free cities existed no
one could die in their midst from starvation, as is unhappily too
often the case in our own times.

However, all such regulations belong to later periods of the
cities' life, while at an earlier period it was the city itself
which used to buy all food supplies for the use of the citizens.
The documents recently published by Mr. Gross are quite positive
on this point and fully support his conclusion to the effect that
the cargoes of subsistences "were purchased by certain civic
officials in the name of the town, and then distributed in shares
among the merchant burgesses, no one being allowed to buy wares
landed in the port unless the municipal authorities refused to
purchase them. This seem--she adds--to have been quite a
common practice in England, Ireland, Wales and Scotland."(49)
Even in the sixteenth century we find that common purchases of
corn were made for the "comoditie and profitt in all things of
this.... Citie and Chamber of London, and of all the Citizens and
Inhabitants of the same as moche as in us lieth"--as the Mayor
wrote in 1565.(50) In Venice, the whole of the trade in corn is
well known to have been in the hands of the city; the "quarters,"
on receiving the cereals from the board which administrated the
imports, being bound to send to every citizen's house the
quantity allotted to him.(51) In France, the city of Amiens used
to purchase salt and to distribute it to all citizens at cost
price;(52) and even now one sees in many French towns the halles
which formerly were municipal depots for corn and salt.(53) In
Russia it was a regular custom in Novgorod and Pskov.

The whole matter relative to the communal purchases for the
use of the citizens, and the manner in which they used to be
made, seems not to have yet received proper attention from the
historians of the period; but there are here and there some very
interesting facts which throw a new light upon it. Thus there is,
among Mr. Gross's documents, a Kilkenny ordinance of the year
1367, from which we learn how the prices of the goods were
established. "The merchants and the sailors," Mr. Gross writes,
"were to state on oath the first cost of the goods and the
expenses of transportation. Then the mayor of the town and two
discreet men were to name the price at which the wares were to be
sold." The same rule held good in Thurso for merchandise coming
"by sea or land." This way of "naming the price" so well answers
to the very conceptions of trade which were current in medieval
times that it must have been all but universal. To have the price
established by a third person was a very old custom; and for all
interchange within the city it certainly was a widely-spread
habit to leave the establishment of prices to "discreet men"--
to a third party--and not to the vendor or the buyer. But this
order of things takes us still further back in the history of
trade--namely, to a time when trade in staple produce was
carried on by the whole city, and the merchants were only the
commissioners, the trustees, of the city for selling the goods
which it exported. A Waterford ordinance, published also by Mr.
Gross, says "that all manere of marchandis what so ever kynde
thei be of... shal be bought by the Maire and balives which bene
commene biers [common buyers, for the town] for the time being,
and to distribute the same on freemen of the citie (the propre
goods of free citisains and inhabitants only excepted)." This
ordinance can Hardly be explained otherwise than by admitting
that all the exterior trade of the town was carried on by its
agents. Moreover, we have direct evidence of such having been the
case for Novgorod and Pskov. It was the Sovereign Novgorod and
the Sovereign Pskov who sent their caravans of merchants to
distant lands.

We know also that in nearly all medieval cities of Middle and
Western Europe, the craft guilds used to buy, as a body, all
necessary raw produce, and to sell the produce of their work
through their officials, and it is hardly possible that the same
should not have been done for exterior trade--the more so as it
is well known that up to the thirteenth century, not only all
merchants of a given city were considered abroad as responsible
in a body for debts contracted by any one of them, but the whole
city as well was responsible for the debts of each one of its
merchants. Only in the twelfth and thirteenth century the towns
on the Rhine entered into special treaties abolishing this
responsibility.(54) And finally we have the remarkable Ipswich
document published by Mr. Gross, from which document we learn
that the merchant guild of this town was constituted by all who
had the freedom of the city, and who wished to pay their
contribution ("their hanse") to the guild, the whole community
discussing all together how better to maintain the merchant
guild, and giving it certain privileges. The merchant guild of
Ipswich thus appears rather as a body of trustees of the town
than as a common private guild.

In short, the more we begin to know the mediaeval city the
more we see that it was not simply a political organization for
the protection of certain political liberties. It was an attempt
at organizing, on a much grander scale than in a village
community, a close union for mutual aid and support, for
consumption and production, and for social life altogether,
without imposing upon men the fetters of the State, but giving
full liberty of expression to the creative genius of each
separate group of individuals in art, crafts, science, commerce,
and political organization. How far this attempt has been
successful will be best seen when we have analyzed in the next
chapter the organization of labour in the medieval city and the
relations of the cities with the surrounding peasant population.

NOTES:

1. W. Arnold, in his Wanderungen und Ansiedelungen der deutschen
Stamme, p. 431, even maintains that one-half of the now arable
area in middle Germany must have been reclaimed from the sixth to
the ninth century. Nitzsch (Geschichte des deutschen Volkes,
Leipzig, 1883, vol. i.) shares the same opinion.

2. Leo and Botta, Histoire d'Italie, French edition, 1844, t. i.,
p. 37.

3. The composition for the stealing of a simple knife was 15
solidii and of the iron parts of a mill, 45 solidii (See on this
subject Lamprecht's Wirthschaft und Recht der Franken in Raumer's
Historisches Taschenbuch, 1883, p. 52.) According to the Riparian
law, the sword, the spear, and the iron armour of a warrior
attained the value of at least twenty-five cows, or two years of
a freeman's labour. A cuirass alone was valued in the Salic law
(Desmichels, quoted by Michelet) at as much as thirty-six bushels
of wheat.

4. The chief wealth of the chieftains, for a long time, was in
their personal domains peopled partly with prisoner slaves, but
chiefly in the above way. On the origin of property see Inama
Sternegg's Die Ausbildung der grossen Grundherrschaften in
Deutschland, in Schmoller's Forschungen, Bd. I., 1878; F. Dahn's
Urgeschichte der germanischen und romanischen Volker, Berlin,
1881; Maurer's Dorfverfassung; Guizot's Essais sur l'histoire de
France; Maine's Village Community; Botta's Histoire d'Italie;
Seebohm, Vinogradov, J. R. Green, etc.

5. See Sir Henry Maine's International Law, London, 1888.

6. Ancient Laws of Ireland, Introduction; E. Nys, Etudes de droit
international, t. i., 1896, pp. 86 seq. Among the Ossetes the
arbiters from three oldest villages enjoy a special reputation
(M. Kovalevsky's Modern Custom and Old Law, Moscow, 1886, ii.
217, Russian).

7. It is permissible to think that this conception (related to
the conception of tanistry) played an important part in the life
of the period; but research has not yet been directed that way.

1. It was distinctly stated in the charter of St. Quentin of the
year 1002 that the ransom for houses which had to be demolished
for crimes went for the city walls. The same destination was
given to the Ungeld in German cities. At Pskov the cathedral was
the bank for the fines, and from this fund money was taken for
the wails.

2. Sohm, Frankische Rechtsund Gerichtsverfassung, p. 23; also
Nitzsch, Geschechte des deutschen Volkes, i. 78.

10. See the excellent remarks on this subject in Augustin
Thierry's Lettres sur l'histoire de France. 7th Letter. The
barbarian translations of parts of the Bible are extremely
instructive on this point.

11. Thirty-six times more than a noble, according to the
Anglo-Saxon law. In the code of Rothari the slaying of a king is,
however, punished by death; but (apart from Roman influence) this
new disposition was introduced (in 646) in the Lombardian law--
as remarked by Leo and Botta--to cover the king from blood
revenge. The king being at that time the executioner of his own
sentences (as the tribe formerly was of its own sentences), he
had to be protected by a special disposition, the more so as
several Lombardian kings before Rothari had been slain in
succession (Leo and Botta, l.c., i. 66-90).

12. Kaufmann, Deutsche Geschichte, Bd. I. "Die Germanen der
Urzeit," p. 133.

13. Dr. F. Dahn, Urgeschichte der germanischen und romanischen
Volker, Berlin, 1881, Bd. I. 96.

14. If I thus follow the views long since advocated by Maurer
(Geschichte der Stadteverfassung in Deutschland, Erlangen, 1869),
it is because he has fully proved the uninterrupted evolution
from the village community to the mediaeval city, and that his
views alone can explain the universality of the communal
movement. Savigny and Eichhorn and their followers have certainly
proved that the traditions of the Roman municipia had never
totally disappeared. But they took no account of the village
community period which the barbarians lived through before they
had any cities. The fact is, that whenever mankind made a new
start in civilization, in Greece, Rome, or middle Europe, it
passed through the same stages--the tribe, the village
community, the free city, the state--each one naturally
evolving out of the preceding stage. Of course, the experience of
each preceding civilization was never lost. Greece (itself
influenced by Eastern civilizations) influenced Rome, and Rome
influenced our civilization; but each of them begin from the same
beginning--the tribe. And just as we cannot say that our states
are continuations of the Roman state, so also can we not say that
the mediaeval cities of Europe (including Scandinavia and Russia)
were a continuation of the Roman cities. They were a continuation
of the barbarian village community, influenced to a certain
extent by the traditions of the Roman towns.

15. M. Kovalevsky, Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of Russia
(Ilchester Lectures, London, 1891, Lecture 4).

16. A considerable amount of research had to be done before this
character of the so-called udyelnyi period was properly
established by the works of Byelaeff (Tales from Russian
History), Kostomaroff (The Beginnings of Autocracy in Russia),
and especially Professor Sergievich (The Vyeche and the Prince).
The English reader may find some information about this period in
the just-named work of M. Kovalevsky, in Rambaud's History of
Russia, and, in a short summary, in the article "Russia" of the
last edition of Chambers's Encyclopaedia.

17. Ferrari, Histoire des revolutions d'Italie, i. 257; Kallsen,
Die deutschen Stadte im Mittelalter, Bd. I. (Halle, 1891).

18. See the excellent remarks of Mr. G.L. Gomme as regards the
folkmote of London (The Literature of Local Institutions, London,
1886, p. 76). It must, however, be remarked that in royal cities
the folkmote never attained the independence which it assumed
elsewhere. It is even certain that Moscow and Paris were chosen
by the kings and the Church as the cradles of the future royal
authority in the State, because they did not possess the
tradition of folkmotes accustomed to act as sovereign in all
matters.

19. A. Luchaire, Les Communes francaises; also Kluckohn,
Geschichte des Gottesfrieden, 1857. L. Semichon (La paix et la
treve de Dieu, 2 vols., Paris, 1869) has tried to represent the
communal movement as issued from that institution. In reality,
the treuga Dei, like the league started under Louis le Gros for
the defence against both the robberies of the nobles and the
Norman invasions, was a thoroughly popular movement. The only
historian who mentions this last league--that is, Vitalis--
describes it as a "popular community" ("Considerations sur
l'histoire de France," in vol. iv. of Aug. Thierry's OEuvres,
Paris, 1868, p. 191 and note).

20. Ferrari, i. 152, 263, etc.

21. Perrens, Histoire de Florence, i. 188; Ferrari, l.c., i. 283.

22. Aug. Thierry, Essai sur l'histoire du Tiers Etat, Paris,
1875, p. 414, note.

23. F. Rocquain, "La Renaissance au XIIe siecle," in Etudes sur
l'histoire de France, Paris, 1875, pp. 55-117.

24. N. Kostomaroff, "The Rationalists of the Twelfth Century," in
his Monographies and Researches (Russian).

25. Very interesting facts relative to the universality of guilds
will be found in "Two Thousand Years of Guild Life," by Rev. J.
M. Lambert, Hull, 1891. On the Georgian amkari, see S.
Eghiazarov, Gorodskiye Tsekhi ("Organization of Transcaucasian
Amkari"), in Memoirs of the Caucasian Geographical Society, xiv.
2, 1891.

26. J.D. Wunderer's "Reisebericht" in Fichard's Frankfurter
Archiv, ii. 245; quoted by Janssen, Geschichte des deutschen
Volkes, i. 355.

27. Dr. Leonard Ennen, Der Dom zu Koln, Historische Einleitung,
Koln, 1871, pp. 46, 50.

28. See previous chapter.

29. Kofod Ancher, Om gamle Danske Gilder og deres Undergang,
Copenhagen, 1785. Statutes of a Knu guild.

30. Upon the position of women in guilds, see Miss Toulmin
Smith's introductory remarks to the English Guilds of her father.
One of the Cambridge statutes (p. 281) of the year 1503 is quite
positive in the following sentence: "Thys statute is made by the
comyne assent of all the bretherne and sisterne of alhallowe
yelde."

31. In medieval times, only secret aggression was treated as a
murder. Blood-revenge in broad daylight was justice; and slaying
in a quarrel was not murder, once the aggressor showed his
willingness to repent and to repair the wrong he had done. Deep
traces of this distinction still exist in modern criminal law,
especially in Russia.

32. Kofod Ancher, l.c. This old booklet contains much that has
been lost sight of by later explorers.

33. They played an important part in the revolts of the serfs,
and were therefore prohibited several times in succession in the
second half of the ninth century. Of course, the king's
prohibitions remained a dead letter.

34. The medieval Italian painters were also organized in guilds,
which became at a later epoch Academies of art. If the Italian
art of those times is impressed with so much individuality that
we distinguish, even now, between the different schools of Padua,
Bassano, Treviso, Verona, and so on, although all these cities
were under the sway of Venice, this was due--J. Paul Richter
remarks--to the fact that the painters of each city belonged to
a separate guild, friendly with the guilds of other towns, but
leading a separate existence. The oldest guild-statute known is
that of Verona, dating from 1303, but evidently copied from some
much older statute. "Fraternal assistance in necessity of
whatever kind," "hospitality towards strangers, when passing
through the town, as thus information may be obtained about
matters which one may like to learn," and "obligation of offering
comfort in case of debility" are among the obligations of the
members (Nineteenth Century, Nov. 1890, and Aug. 1892).

35. The chief works on the artels are named in the article
"Russia" of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 9th edition, p. 84.

36. See, for instance, the texts of the Cambridge guilds given by
Toulmin Smith (English Guilds, London, 1870, pp. 274-276), from
which it appears that the "generall and principall day" was the
"eleccioun day;" or, Ch. M. Clode's The Early History of the
Guild of the Merchant Taylors, London, 1888, i. 45; and so on.
For the renewal of allegiance, see the Jomsviking saga, mentioned
in Pappenheim's Altdanische Schutzgilden, Breslau, 1885, p. 67.
It appears very probable that when the guilds began to be
prosecuted, many of them inscribed in their statutes the meal day
only, or their pious duties, and only alluded to the judicial
function of the guild in vague words; but this function did not
disappear till a very much later time. The question, "Who will be
my judge?" has no meaning now, since the State has appropriated
for its bureaucracy the organization of justice; but it was of
primordial importance in medieval times, the more so as
self-jurisdiction meant self-administration. It must also be
remarked that the translation of the Saxon and Danish
"guild-bretheren," or "brodre," by the Latin convivii must also
have contributed to the above confusion.

37. See the excellent remarks upon the frith guild by J.R. Green
and Mrs. Green in The Conquest of England, London, 1883, pp.
229-230.

38. None

39. Recueil des ordonnances des rois de France, t. xii. 562;
quoted by Aug. Thierry in Considerations sur l'histoire de
France, p. 196, ed. 12mo.

40. A. Luchaire, Les Communes francaises, pp, 45-46.

41. Guilbert de Nogent, De vita sua, quoted by Luchaire, l.c., p.
14.

42. Lebret, Histoire de Venise, i. 393; also Marin, quoted by Leo
and Botta in Histoire de l'Italie, French edition, 1844, t. i
500.

43. Dr. W. Arnold, Verfassungsgeschichte der deutschen
Freistadte, 1854, Bd. ii. 227 seq.; Ennen, Geschichte der Stadt
Koeln, Bd. i. 228-229; also the documents published by Ennen and
Eckert.

44. Conquest of England, 1883, p. 453.

45. Byelaeff, Russian History, vols. ii. and iii.

46. W. Gramich, Verfassungsund Verwaltungsgeschichte der Stadt
Wurzburg im 13. bis zum 15. Jahrhundert, Wurzburg, 1882, p. 34.

47. When a boat brought a cargo of coal to Wurzburg, coal could
only be sold in retail during the first eight days, each family
being entitled to no more than fifty basketfuls. The remaining
cargo could be sold wholesale, but the retailer was allowed to
raise a zittlicher profit only, the unzittlicher, or dishonest
profit, being strictly forbidden (Gramich, l.c.). Same in London
(Liber albus, quoted by Ochenkowski, p. 161), and, in fact,
everywhere.

48. See Fagniez, Etudes sur l'industrie et la classe industrielle
a Paris au XIIIme et XIVme siecle, Paris, 1877, pp. 155 seq. It
hardly need be added that the tax on bread, and on beer as well,
was settled after careful experiments as to the quantity of bread
and beer which could be obtained from a given amount of corn. The
Amiens archives contain the minutes of such experiences (A. de
Calonne, l.c. pp. 77, 93). Also those of London (Ochenkowski,
England's wirthschaftliche Entwickelung, etc., Jena, 1879, p.
165).

49. Ch. Gross, The Guild Merchant, Oxford, 1890, i. 135. His
documents prove that this practice existed in Liverpool (ii.
148-150), Waterford in Ireland, Neath in Wales, and Linlithgow
and Thurso in Scotland. Mr. Gross's texts also show that the
purchases were made for distribution, not only among the merchant
burgesses, but "upon all citsains and commynalte" (p. 136, note),
or, as the Thurso ordinance of the seventeenth century runs, to
"make offer to the merchants, craftsmen, and inhabitants of the
said burgh, that they may have their proportion of the same,
according to their necessitys and ability."

50. The Early History of the Guild of Merchant Taylors, by
Charles M. Clode, London, 1888, i. 361, appendix 10; also the
following appendix which shows that the same purchases were made
in 1546.

51. Cibrario, Les conditions economiques de l'Italie au temps de
Dante, Paris, 1865, p. 44.

52. A. de Calonne, La vie municipale au XVme siecle dans le Nord
de la France, Paris, 1880, pp. 12-16. In 1485 the city permitted
the export to Antwerp of a certain quantity of corn, "the
inhabitants of Antwerp being always ready to be agreeable to the
merchants and burgesses of Amiens" (ibid., pp. 75-77 and texts).

53. A. Babeau, La ville sous l'ancien regime, Paris, 1880.

54. Ennen, Geschichte der Stadt Koln, i. 491, 492, also texts.






CHAPTER VI

MUTUAL AID IN THE MEDIAEVAL CITY (continued)

Likeness and diversity among the medieval cities. The
craftguilds: State-attributes in each of them. Attitude of the
city towards the peasants; attempts to free them. The lords. 
Results achieved by the medieval city: in arts, in learning. 
Causes of decay.





The medieval cities were not organized upon some preconceived
plan in obedience to the will of an outside legislator. Each of
them was a natural growth in the full sense of the word--an
always varying result of struggle between various forces which
adjusted and re-adjusted themselves in conformity with their
relative energies, the chances of their conflicts, and the
support they found in their surroundings. Therefore, there are
not two cities whose inner organization and destinies would have
been identical. Each one, taken separately, varies from century
to century. And yet, when we cast a broad glance upon all the
cities of Europe, the local and national unlikenesses disappear,
and we are struck to find among all of them a wonderful
resemblance, although each has developed for itself,
independently from the others, and in different conditions. A
small town in the north of Scotland, with its population of
coarse labourers and fishermen; a rich city of Flanders, with its
world-wide commerce, luxury, love of amusement and animated life;
an Italian city enriched by its intercourse with the East, and
breeding within its walls a refined artistic taste and
civilization; and a poor, chiefly agricultural, city in the marsh
and lake district of Russia, seem to have little in common. And
nevertheless, the leading lines of their organization, and the
spirit which animates them, are imbued with a strong family
likeness. Everywhere we see the same federations of small
communities and guilds, the same "sub-towns" round the mother
city, the same folkmote, and the same insigns of its
independence. The defensor of the city, under different names and
in different accoutrements, represents the same authority and
interests; food supplies, labour and commerce, are organized on
closely similar lines; inner and outer struggles are fought with
like ambitions; nay, the very formulae used in the struggles, as
also in the annals, the ordinances, and the rolls, are identical;
and the architectural monuments, whether Gothic, Roman, or
Byzantine in style, express the same aspirations and the same
ideals; they are conceived and built in the same way. Many
dissemblances are mere differences of age, and those disparities
between sister cities which are real are repeated in different
parts of Europe. The unity of the leading idea and the identity
of origin make up for differences of climate, geographical
situation, wealth, language and religion. This is why we can
speak of the medieval city as of a well-defined phase of
civilization; and while every research insisting upon local and
individual differences is most welcome, we may still indicate the
chief lines of development which are common to all cities.(1)

There is no doubt that the protection which used to be
accorded to the market-place from the earliest barbarian times
has played an important, though not an exclusive, part in the
emancipation of the medieval city. The early barbarians knew no
trade within their village communities; they traded with
strangers only, at certain definite spots, on certain determined
days. And, in order that the stranger might come to the
barter-place without risk of being slain for some feud which
might be running between two kins, the market was always placed
under the special protection of all kins. It was inviolable, like
the place of worship under the shadow of which it was held. With
the Kabyles it is still annaya, like the footpath along which
women carry water from the well; neither must be trodden upon in
arms, even during inter-tribal wars. In medieval times the market
universally enjoyed the same protection.(2) No feud could be
prosecuted on the place whereto people came to trade, nor within
a certain radius from it; and if a quarrel arose in the motley
crowd of buyers and sellers, it had to be brought before those
under whose protection the market stood--the community's
tribunal, or the bishop's, the lord's, or the king's judge. A
stranger who came to trade was a guest, and he went on under this
very name. Even the lord who had no scruples about robbing a
merchant on the high road, respected the Weichbild, that is, the
pole which stood in the market-place and bore either the king's
arms, or a glove, or the image of the local saint, or simply a
cross, according to whether the market was under the protection
of the king, the lord, the local church, or the folkmote--the
vyeche.(3)

It is easy to understand how the self-jurisdiction of the
city could develop out of the special jurisdiction in the
market-place, when this last right was conceded, willingly or
not, to the city itself. And such an origin of the city's
liberties, which can be traced in very many cases, necessarily
laid a special stamp upon their subsequent development. It gave a
predominance to the trading part of the community. The burghers
who possessed a house in the city at the time being, and were
co-owners in the town-lands, constituted very often a merchant
guild which held in its hands the city's trade; and although at
the outset every burgher, rich and poor, could make part of the
merchant guild, and the trade itself seems to have been carried
on for the entire city by its trustees, the guild gradually
became a sort of privileged body. It jealously prevented the
outsiders who soon began to flock into the free cities from
entering the guild, and kept the advantages resulting from trade
for the few "families" which had been burghers at the time of the
emancipation. There evidently was a danger of a merchant
oligarchy being thus constituted. But already in the tenth, and
still more during the two next centuries, the chief crafts, also
organized in guilds, were powerful enough to check the oligarchic
tendencies of the merchants.

The craft guild was then a common seller of its produce and a
common buyer of the raw materials, and its members were merchants
and manual workers at the same time. Therefore, the predominance
taken by the old craft guilds from the very beginnings of the
free city life guaranteed to manual labour the high position
which it afterwards occupied in the city.(4) In fact, in a
medieval city manual labour was no token of inferiority; it bore,
on the contrary, traces of the high respect it had been kept in
in the village community. Manual labour in a "mystery" was
considered as a pious duty towards the citizens: a public
function (Amt), as honourable as any other. An idea of "justice"
to the community, of "right" towards both producer and consumer,
which would seem so extravagant now, penetrated production and
exchange. The tanner's, the cooper's, or the shoemaker's work
must be "just," fair, they wrote in those times. Wood, leather or
thread which are used by the artisan must be "right"; bread must
be baked "in justice," and so on. Transport this language into
our present life, and it would seem affected and unnatural; but
it was natural and unaffected then, because the medieval artisan
did not produce for an unknown buyer, or to throw his goods into
an unknown market. He produced for his guild first; for a
brotherhood of men who knew each other, knew the technics of the
craft, and, in naming the price of each product, could appreciate
the skill displayed in its fabrication or the labour bestowed
upon it. Then the guild, not the separate producer, offered the
goods for sale in the community, and this last, in its turn,
offered to the brotherhood of allied communities those goods
which were exported, and assumed responsibility for their
quality. With such an organization, it was the ambition of each
craft not to offer goods of inferior quality, and technical
defects or adulterations became a matter concerning the whole
community, because, an ordinance says, "they would destroy public
confidence."(5) Production being thus a social duty, placed
under the control of the whole amitas, manual labour could not
fall into the degraded condition which it occupies now, so long
as the free city was living.

A difference between master and apprentice, or between master
and worker (compayne, Geselle), existed but in the medieval
cities from their very beginnings; this was at the outset a mere
difference of age and skill, not of wealth and power. After a
seven years' apprenticeship, and after having proved his
knowledge and capacities by a work of art, the apprentice became
a master himself. And only much later, in the sixteenth century,
after the royal power had destroy ed the city and the craft
organization, was it possible to become master in virtue of
simple inheritance or wealth. But this was also the time of a
general decay in medieval industries and art.

There was not much room for hired work in the early
flourishing periods of the medieval cities, still less for
individual hirelings. The work of the weavers, the archers, the
smiths, the bakers, and so on, was performed for the craft and
the city; and when craftsmen were hired in the building trades,
they worked as temporary corporations (as they still do in the
Russian artels), whose work was paid en bloc. Work for a master
began to multiply only later on; but even in this case the worker
was paid better than he is paid now, even in this country, and
very much better than he used to be paid all over Europe in the
first half of this century. Thorold Rogers has familiarized
English readers with this idea; but the same is true for the
Continent as well, as is shown by the researches of Falke and
Schonberg, and by many occasional indications. Even in the
fifteenth century a mason, a carpenter, or a smith worker would
be paid at Amiens four sols a day, which corresponded to
forty-eight pounds of bread, or to the eighth part of a small ox
(bouvard). In Saxony, the salary of the Geselle in the building
trade was such that, to put it in Falke's words, he could buy
with his six days' wages three sheep and one pair of shoes.(6)
The donations of workers (Geselle) to cathedrals also bear
testimony of their relative well-being, to say nothing of the
glorious donations of certain craft guilds nor of what they used
to spend in festivities and pageants.(7) In fact, the more we
learn about the medieval city, the more we are convinced that at
no time has labour enjoyed such conditions of prosperity and such
respect as when city life stood at its highest.

More than that; not only many aspirations of our modern
radicals were already realized in the middle ages, but much of
what is described now as Utopian was accepted then as a matter of
fact. We are laughed at when we say that work must be pleasant,
but--"every one must be pleased with his work," a medieval
Kuttenberg ordinance says, "and no one shall, while doing nothing
(mit nichts thun), appropriate for himself what others have
produced by application and work, because laws must be a shield
for application and work."(8) And amidst all present talk about
an eight hours' day, it may be well to remember an ordinance of
Ferdinand the First relative to the Imperial coal mines, which
settled the miner's day at eight hours, "as it used to be of old"
(wie vor Alters herkommen), and work on Saturday afternoon was
prohibited. Longer hours were very rare, we are told by Janssen,
while shorter hours were of common occurrence. In this country,
in the fifteenth century, Rogers says, "the workmen worked only
forty-eight hours a week."(9) The Saturday half-holiday, too,
which we consider as a modern conquest, was in reality an old
medieval institution; it was bathing-time for a great part of the
community, while Wednesday afternoon was bathing-time for the
Geselle.(10) And although school meals did not exist--probably
because no children went hungry to school--a distribution of
bath-money to the children whose parents found difficulty in
providing it was habitual in several places As to Labour
Congresses, they also were a regular Feature of the middles ages.
In some parts of Germany craftsmen of the same trade, belonging
to different communes, used to come together every year to
discuss questions relative to their trade, the years of
apprenticeship, the wandering years, the wages, and so on; and in
1572, the Hanseatic towns formally recognized the right of the
crafts to come together at periodical congresses, and to take any
resolutions, so long as they were not contrary to the cities'
rolls, relative to the quality of goods. Such Labour Congresses,
partly international like the Hansa itself, are known to have
been held by bakers, founders, smiths, tanners, sword-makers and
cask-makers.(11)

The craft organization required, of course, a close
supervision of the craftsmen by the guild, and special jurates
were always nominated for that purpose. But it is most remarkable
that, so long as the cities lived their free life, no complaints
were heard about the supervision; while, after the State had
stepped in, confiscating the property of the guilds and
destroying their independence in favour of its own bureaucracy,
the complaints became simply countless.(12) On the other hand,
the immensity of progress realized in all arts under the
mediaeval guild system is the best proof that the system was no
hindrance to individual initiative.(13) The fact is, that the
medieval guild, like the medieval parish, "street," or "quarter,"
was not a body of citizens, placed under the control of State
functionaries; it was a union of all men connected with a given
trade: jurate buyers of raw produce, sellers of manufactured
goods, and artisans--masters, "compaynes," and apprentices. For
the inner organization of the trade its assembly was sovereign,
so long as it did not hamper the other guilds, in which case the
matter was brought before the guild of the guilds--the city.
But there was in it something more than that. It had its own
self-jurisdiction, its own military force, its own general
assemblies, its own traditions of struggles, glory, and
independence, its own relations with other guilds of the same
trade in other cities: it had, in a word, a full organic life
which could only result from the integrality of the vital
functions. When the town was called to arms, the guild appeared
as a separate company (Schaar), armed with its own arms (or its
own guns, lovingly decorated by the guild, at a subsequent
epoch), under its own self-elected commanders. It was, in a word,
as independent a unit of the federation as the republic of Uri or
Geneva was fifty years ago in the Swiss Confederation. So that,
to compare it with a modern trade union, divested of all
attributes of State sovereignty, and reduced to a couple of
functions of secondary importance, is as unreasonable as to
compare Florence or Brugge with a French commune vegetating under
the Code Napoleon, or with a Russian town placed under Catherine
the Second's municipal law. Both have elected mayors, and the
latter has also its craft corporations; but the difference is--
all the difference that exists between Florence and
Fontenay-les-Oies or Tsarevokokshaisk, or between a Venetian doge
and a modern mayor who lifts his hat before the sous-prefet's
clerk.

The medieval guilds were capable of maintaining their
independence; and, later on, especially in the fourteenth
century, when, in consequence of several causes which shall
presently be indicated, the old municipal life underwent a deep
modification, the younger crafts proved strong enough to conquer
their due share in the management of the city affairs. The
masses, organized in "minor" arts, rose to wrest the power out of
the hands of a growing oligarchy, and mostly succeeded in this
task, opening again a new era of prosperity. True, that in some
cities the uprising was crushed in blood, and mass decapitations
of workers followed, as was the case in Paris in 1306, and in
Cologne in 1371. In such cases the city's liberties rapidly fell
into decay, and the city was gradually subdued by the central
authority. But the majority of the towns had preserved enough of
vitality to come out of the turmoil with a new life and
vigour.(14) A new period of rejuvenescence was their reward. New
life was infused, and it found its expression in splendid
architectural monuments, in a new period of prosperity, in a
sudden progress of technics and invention, and in a new
intellectual movement leading to the Renaissance and to the
Reformation.

The life of a mediaeval city was a succession of hard battles
to conquer liberty and to maintain it. True, that a strong and
tenacious race of burghers had developed during those fierce
contests; true, that love and worship of the mother city had been
bred by these struggles, and that the grand things achieved by
the mediaeval communes were a direct outcome of that love. But
the sacrifices which the communes had to sustain in the battle
for freedom were, nevertheless, cruel, and left deep traces of
division on their inner life as well. Very few cities had
succeeded, under a concurrence of favourable circumstances, in
obtaining liberty at one stroke, and these few mostly lost it
equally easily; while the great number had to fight fifty or a
hundred years in succession, often more, before their rights to
free life had been recognized, and another hundred years to found
their liberty on a firm basis--the twelfth century charters
thus being but one of the stepping-stones to freedom.(15) In
reality, the mediaeval city was a fortified oasis amidst a
country plunged into feudal submission, and it had to make room
for itself by the force of its arms. In consequence of the causes
briefly alluded to in the preceding chapter, each village
community had gradually fallen under the yoke of some lay or
clerical lord. His house had grown to be a castle, and his
brothers-in-arms were now the scum of adventurers, always ready
to plunder the peasants. In addition to three days a week which
the peasants had to work for the lord, they had also to bear all
sorts of exactions for the right to sow and to crop, to be gay or
sad, to live, to marry, or to die. And, worst of all, they were
continually plundered by the armed robbers of some neighbouring
lord, who chose to consider them as their master's kin, and to
take upon them, and upon their cattle and crops, the revenge for
a feud he was fighting against their owner. Every meadow, every
field, every river, and road around the city, and every man upon
the land was under some lord.

The hatred of the burghers towards the feudal barons has
found a most characteristic expression in the wording of the
different charters which they compelled them to sign. Heinrich V.
is made to sign in the charter granted to Speier in 1111, that he
frees the burghers from "the horrible and execrable law of
mortmain, through which the town has been sunk into deepest
poverty" (von dem scheusslichen und nichtswurdigen Gesetze,
welches gemein Budel genannt wird, Kallsen, i. 307). The coutume
of Bayonne, written about 1273, contains such passages as these:
"The people is anterior to the lords. It is the people, more
numerous than all others, who, desirous of peace, has made the
lords for bridling and knocking down the powerful ones, "and so
on (Giry, Etablissements de Rouen, i. 117, Quoted by Luchaire, p.
24). A charter submitted for King Robert's signature is equally
characteristic. He is made to say in it: "I shall rob no oxen nor
other animals. I shall seize no merchants, nor take their moneys,
nor impose ransom. From Lady Day to the All Saints' Day I shall
seize no horse, nor mare, nor foals, in the meadows. I shall not
burn the mills, nor rob the flour... I shall offer no protection
to thieves," etc. (Pfister has published that document,
reproduced by Luchaire). The charter "granted" by the Besancon
Archbishop Hugues, in which he has been compelled to enumerate
all the mischiefs due to his mortmain rights, is equally
characteristic.(16) And so on.

Freedom could not be maintained in such surroundings, and the
cities were compelled to carry on the war outside their walls.
The burghers sent out emissaries to lead revolt in the villages;
they received villages into their corporations, and they waged
direct war against the nobles. It Italy, where the land was
thickly sprinkled with feudal castles, the war assumed heroic
proportions, and was fought with a stern acrimony on both sides.
Florence sustained for seventy-seven years a succession of bloody
wars, in order to free its contado from the nobles; but when the
conquest had been accomplished (in 1181) all had to begin anew.
The nobles rallied; they constituted their own leagues in
opposition to the leagues of the towns, and, receiving fresh
support from either the Emperor or the Pope, they made the war
last for another 130 years. The same took place in Rome, in
Lombardy, all over Italy.

Prodigies of valour, audacity, and tenaciousness were
displayed by the citizens in these wars. But the bows and the
hatchets of the arts and crafts had not always the upper hand in
their encounters with the armour-clad knights, and many castles
withstood the ingenious siege-machinery and the perseverance of
the citizens. Some cities, like Florence, Bologna, and many towns
in France, Germany, and Bohemia, succeeded in emancipating the
surrounding villages, and they were rewarded for their efforts by
an extraordinary prosperity and tranquillity. But even here, and
still more in the less strong or less impulsive towns, the
merchants and artisans, exhausted by war, and misunderstanding
their own interests, bargained over the peasants' heads. They
compelled the lord to swear allegiance to the city; his country
castle was dismantled, and he agreed to build a house and to
reside in the city, of which he became a co-burgher
(com-bourgeois, con-cittadino); but he maintained in return most
of his rights upon the peasants, who only won a partial relief
from their burdens. The burgher could not understand that equal
rights of citizenship might be granted to the peasant upon whose
food supplies he had to rely, and a deep rent was traced between
town and village. In some cases the peasants simply changed
owners, the city buying out the barons' rights and selling them
in shares to her own citizens.(17) Serfdom was maintained, and
only much later on, towards the end of the thirteenth century, it
was the craft revolution which undertook to put an end to it, and
abolished personal servitude, but dispossessed at the same time
the serfs of the land.(18) It hardly need be added that the
fatal results of such policy were soon felt by the cities
themselves; the country became the city's enemy.

The war against the castles had another bad effect. It
involved the cities in a long succession of mutual wars, which
have given origin to the theory, till lately in vogue, namely,
that the towns lost their independence through their own
jealousies and mutual fights. The imperialist historians have
especially supported this theory, which, however, is very much
undermined now by modern research. It is certain that in Italy
cities fought each other with a stubborn animosity, but nowhere
else did such contests attain the same proportions; and in Italy
itself the city wars, especially those of the earlier period, had
their special causes. They were (as was already shown by Sismondi
and Ferrari) a mere continuation of the war against the castles--
the free municipal and federative principle unavoidably
entering into a fierce contest with feudalism, imperialism, and
papacy. Many towns which had but partially shaken off the yoke of
the bishop, the lord, or the Emperor, were simply driven against
the free cities by the nobles, the Emperor, and Church, whose
policy was to divide the cities and to arm them against each
other. These special circumstances (partly reflected on to
Germany also) explain why the Italian towns, some of which
Sollght support with the Emperor to combat the Pope, while the
others sought support from the Church to resist the Emperor, were
soon divided into a Gibelin and a Guelf camp, and why the same
division appeared in each separate city.(19)

The immense economical progress realized by most italian
cities just at the time when these wars were hottest,(20) and
the alliances so easily concluded between towns, still better
characterize those struggles and further undermine the above
theory. Already in the years 1130-1150 powerful leagues came into
existence; and a few years later, when Frederick Barbarossa
invaded Italy and, supported by the nobles and some retardatory
cities, marched against Milan, popular enthusiasm was roused in
many towns by popular preachers. Crema, Piacenza, Brescia,
Tortona, etc., went to the rescue; the banners of the guilds of
Verona, Padua, Vicenza, and Trevisa floated side by side in the
cities' camp against the banners of the Emperor and the nobles.
Next year the Lombardian League came into existence, and sixty
years later we see it reinforced by many other cities, and
forming a lasting organization which had half of its federal
war-chest in Genoa and the other half in Venice.(21) In Tuscany,
Florence headed another powerful league, to which Lucca, Bologna,
Pistoia, etc., belonged, and which played an important part in
crushing down the nobles in middle Italy, while smaller leagues
were of common occurrence. It is thus certain that although petty
jealousies undoubtedly existed, and discord could be easily sown,
they did not prevent the towns from uniting together for the
common defence of liberty. Only later on, when separate cities
became little States, wars broke out between them, as always must
be the case when States struggle for supremacy or colonies.

Similar leagues were formed in Germany for the same purpose.
When, under the successors of Conrad, the land was the prey of
interminable feuds between the nobles, the Westphalian towns
concluded a league against the knights, one of the clauses of
which was never to lend money to a knight who would continue to
conceal stolen goods.(22) When "the knights and the nobles lived
on plunder, and murdered whom they chose to murder," as the
Wormser Zorn complains, the cities on the Rhine (Mainz, Cologne,
Speier, Strasburg, and Basel) took the initiative of a league
which soon numbered sixty allied towns, repressed the robbers,
and maintained peace. Later on, the league of the towns of
Suabia, divided into three "peace districts" (Augsburg,
Constance, and Ulm), had the same purpose. And even when such
leagues were broken,(23) they lived long enough to show that
while the supposed peacemakers--the kings, the emperors, and
the Church-fomented discord, and were themselves helpless against
the robber knights, it was from the cities that the impulse came
for re-establishing peace and union. The cities--not the
emperors--were the real makers of the national unity.(24)

Similar federations were organized for the same purpose among
small villages, and now that attention has been drawn to this
subject by Luchaire we may expect soon to learn much more about
them. Villages joined into small federations in the contado of
Florence, so also in the dependencies of Novgorod and Pskov. As
to France, there is positive evidence of a federation of
seventeen peasant villages which has existed in the Laonnais for
nearly a hundred years (till 1256), and has fought hard for its
independence. Three more peasant republics, which had sworn
charters similar to those of Laon and Soissons, existed in the
neighbourhood of Laon, and, their territories being contiguous,
they supported each other in their liberation wars. Altogether,
Luchaire is of the opinion that many such federations must have
come into existence in France in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries, but that documents relative to them are mostly lost.
Of course, being unprotected by walls, they could easily be
crushed down by the kings and the lords; but in certain
favourable circumstances, when they found support in a league of
towns and protection in their mountains, such peasant republics
became independent units of the Swiss Confederation.(25)

As to unions between cities for peaceful purposes, they were
of quite common occurrence. The intercourse which had been
established during the period of liberation was not interrupted
afterwards. Sometimes, when the scabini of a German town, having
to pronounce judgment in a new or complicated case, declared that
they knew not the sentence (des Urtheiles nicht weise zu sein),
they sent delegates to another city to get the sentence. The same
happened also in France;(26) while Forli and Ravenna are known
to have mutually naturalized their citizens and granted them full
rights in both cities. To submit a contest arisen between two
towns, or within a city, to another commune which was invited to
act as arbiter, was also in the spirit of the times.(27) As to
commercial treaties between cities, they were quite
habitual.(28) Unions for regulating the production and the sizes
of casks which were used for the commerce in wine, "herring
unions," and so on, were mere precursors of the great commercial
federations of the Flemish Hansa, and, later on, of the great
North German Hansa, the history of which alone might contribute
pages and pages to illustrate the federation spirit which
permeated men at that time. It hardly need be added, that through
the Hanseatic unions the medieval cities have contributed more to
the development of international intercourse, navigation, and
maritime discovery than all the States of the first seventeen
centuries of our era.

In a word, federations between small territorial units, as
well as among men united by common pursuits within their
respective guilds, and federations between cities and groups of
cities constituted the very essence of life and thought during
that period. The first five of the second decade of centuries of
our era may thus be described as an immense attempt at securing
mutual aid and support on a grand scale, by means of the
principles of federation and association carried on through all
manifestations of human life and to all possible degrees. This
attempt was attended with success to a very great extent. It
united men formerly divided; it secured them a very great deal of
freedom, and it tenfolded their forces. At a time when
particularism was bred by so many agencies, and the causes of
discord and jealousy might have been so numerous, it is
gratifying to see that cities scattered over a wide continent had
so much in common, and were so ready to confederate for the
prosecution of so many common aims. They succumbed in the long
run before powerful enemies; not having understood the mutual-aid
principle widely enough, they themselves committed fatal faults;
but they did not perish through their own jealousies, and their
errors were not a want of federation spirit among themselves.

The results of that new move which mankind made in the
medieval city were immense. At the beginning of the eleventh
century the towns of Europe were small clusters of miserable
huts, adorned but with low clumsy churches, the builders of which
hardly knew how to make an arch; the arts, mostly consisting of
some weaving and forging, were in their infancy; learning was
found in but a few monasteries. Three hundred and fifty years
later, the very face of Europe had been changed. The land was
dotted with rich cities, surrounded by immense thick walls which
were embellished by towers and gates, each of them a work of art
in itself. The cathedrals, conceived in a grand style and
profusely decorated, lifted their bell-towers to the skies,
displaying a purity of form and a boldness of imagination which
we now vainly strive to attain. The crafts and arts had risen to
a degree of perfection which we can hardly boast of having
superseded in many directions, if the inventive skill of the
worker and the superior finish of his work be appreciated higher
than rapidity of fabrication. The navies of the free cities
furrowed in all directions the Northern and the Southern
Mediterranean; one effort more, and they would cross the oceans.
Over large tracts of land well-being had taken the place of
misery; learning had grown and spread. The methods of science had
been elaborated; the basis of natural philosophy had been laid
down; and the way had been paved for all the mechanical
inventions of which our own times are so proud. Such were the
magic changes accomplished in Europe in less than four hundred
years. And the losses which Europe sustained through the loss of
its free cities can only be understood when we compare the
seventeenth century with the fourteenth or the thirteenth. The
prosperity which formerly characterized Scotland, Germany, the
plains of Italy, was gone. The roads had fallen into an abject
state, the cities were depopulated, labour was brought into
slavery, art had vanished, commerce itself was decaying.(29)

If the medieval cities had bequeathed to us no written
documents to testify of their splendour, and left nothing behind
but the monuments of building art which we see now all over
Europe, from Scotland to Italy, and from Gerona in Spain to
Breslau in Slavonian territory, we might yet conclude that the
times of independent city life were times of the greatest
development of human intellect during the Christian era down to
the end of the eighteenth century. On looking, for instance, at a
medieval picture representing Nuremberg with its scores of towers
and lofty spires, each of which bore the stamp of free creative
art, we can hardly conceive that three hundred years before the
town was but a collection of miserable hovels. And our admiration
grows when we go into the details of the architecture and
decorations of each of the countless churches, bell-towers,
gates, and communal houses which are scattered all over Europe as
far east as Bohemia and the now dead towns of Polish Galicia. Not
only Italy, that mother of art, but all Europe is full of such
monuments. The very fact that of all arts architecture--a
social art above all--had attained the highest development, is
significant in itself. To be what it was, it must have originated
from an eminently social life.

Medieval architecture attained its grandeur--not only
because it was a natural development of handicraft; not only
because each building, each architectural decoration, had been
devised by men who knew through the experience of their own hands
what artistic effects can be obtained from stone, iron, bronze,
or even from simple logs and mortar; not only because, each
monument was a result of collective experience, accumulated in
each "mystery" or craft(30)--it was grand because it was born
out of a grand idea. Like Greek art, it sprang out of a
conception of brotherhood and unity fostered by the city. It had
an audacity which could only be won by audacious struggles and
victories; it had that expression of vigour, because vigour
permeated all the life of the city. A cathedral or a communal
house symbolized the grandeur of an organism of which every mason
and stone-cutter was the builder, and a medieval building appears--
not as a solitary effort to which thousands of slaves would
have contributed the share assigned them by one man's
imagination; all the city contributed to it. The lofty bell-tower
rose upon a structure, grand in itself, in which the life of the
city was throbbing--not upon a meaningless scaffold like the
Paris iron tower, not as a sham structure in stone intended to
conceal the ugliness of an iron frame, as has been done in the
Tower Bridge. Like the Acropolis of Athens, the cathedral of a
medieval city was intended to glorify the grandeur of the
victorious city, to symbolize the union of its crafts, to express
the glory of each citizen in a city of his own creation. After
having achieved its craft revolution, the city often began a new
cathedral in order to express the new, wider, and broader union
which had been called into life.

The means at hand for these grand undertakings were
disproportionately small. Cologne Cathedral was begun with a
yearly outlay of but 500 marks; a gift of 100 marks was inscribed
as a grand donation;(31) and even when the work approached
completion, and gifts poured in in proportion, the yearly outlay
in money stood at about 5,000 marks, and never exceeded 14,000.
The cathedral of Basel was built with equally small means. But
each corporation contributed its part of stone, work, and
decorative genius to their common monument. Each guild expressed
in it its political conceptions, telling in stone or in bronze
the history of the city, glorifying the principles of "Liberty,
equality, and fraternity,"(32) praising the city's allies, and
sending to eternal fire its enemies. And each guild bestowed its
love upon the communal monument by richly decorating it with
stained windows, paintings, "gates, worthy to be the gates of
Paradise," as Michel Angelo said, or stone decorations of each
minutest corner of the building.(33) Small cities, even small
parishes,(34) vied with the big agglomerations in this work, and
the cathedrals of Laon and St. Ouen hardly stand behind that of
Rheims, or the Communal House of Bremen, or the folkmote's
bell-tower of Breslau. "No works must be begun by the commune but
such as are conceived in response to the grand heart of the
commune, composed of the hearts of all citizens, united in one
common will"--such were the words of the Council of Florence;
and this spirit appears in all communal works of common utility,
such as the canals, terraces, vineyards, and fruit gardens around
Florence, or the irrigation canals which intersected the plains
of Lombardy, or the port and aqueduct of Genoa, or, in fact, any
works of the kind which were achieved by almost every city.(35)

All arts had progressed in the same way in the medieval
cities, those of our own days mostly being but a continuation of
what had grown at that time. The prosperity of the Flemish cities
was based upon the fine woollen cloth they fabricated. Florence,
at the beginning of the fourteenth century, before the black
death, fabricated from 70,000 to 100,000 panni of woollen stuffs,
which were valued at 1,200,000 golden florins.(36) The
chiselling of precious metals, the art of casting, the fine
forging of iron, were creations of the mediaeval "mysteries" which
had succeeded in attaining in their own domains all that could be
made by the hand, without the use of a powerful prime motor. By
the hand and by invention, because, to use Whewell's words:

"Parchment and paper, printing and engraving, improved glass
and steel, gunpowder, clocks, telescopes, the mariner's compass,
the reformed calendar, the decimal notation; algebra,
trigonometry, chemistry, counterpoint (an invention equivalent to
a new creation of music); these are all possessions which we
inherit from that which has so disparagingly been termed the
Stationary Period" (History of Inductive Sciences, i. 252).

True that no new principle was illustrated by any of these
discoveries, as Whewell said; but medieval science had done
something more than the actual discovery of new principles. It
had prepared the discovery of all the new principles which we
know at the present time in mechanical sciences: it had
accustomed the explorer to observe facts and to reason from them.
It was inductive science, even though it had not yet fully
grasped the importance and the powers of induction; and it laid
the foundations of both mechanics and natural philosophy. Francis
Bacon, Galileo, and Copernicus were the direct descendants of a
Roger Bacon and a Michael Scot, as the steam engine was a direct
product of the researches carried on in the Italian universities
on the weight of the atmosphere, and of the mathematical and
technical learning which characterized Nuremberg.

But why should one take trouble to insist upon the advance of
science and art in the medieval city? Is it not enough to point
to the cathedrals in the domain of skill, and to the Italian
language and the poem of Dante in the domain of thought, to give
at once the measure of what the medieval city created during the
four centuries it lived?

The medieval cities have undoubtedly rendered an immense
service to European civilization. They have prevented it from
being drifted into the theocracies and despotical states of old;
they have endowed it with the variety, the self-reliance, the
force of initiative, and the immense intellectual and material
energies it now possesses, which are the best pledge for its
being able to resist any new invasion of the East. But why did
these centres of civilization, which attempted to answer to
deeply-seated needs of human nature, and were so full of life,
not live further on? Why were they seized with senile debility in
the sixteenth century? and, after having repulsed so many
assaults from without, and only borrowed new vigour from their
interior struggles, why did they finally succumb to both?

Various causes contributed to this effect, some of them
having their roots in the remote past, while others originated in
the mistakes committed by the cities themselves. Towards the end
of the fifteenth century, mighty States, reconstructed on the old
Roman pattern, were already coming into existence. In each
country and each region some feudal lord, more cunning, more
given to hoarding, and often less scrupulous than his neighbours,
had succeeded in appropriating to himself richer personal
domains, more peasants on his lands, more knights in his
following, more treasures in his chest. He had chosen for his
seat a group of happily-situated villages, not yet trained into
free municipal life--Paris, Madrid, or Moscow--and with the
labour of his serfs he had made of them royal fortified cities,
whereto he attracted war companions by a free distribution of
villages, and merchants by the protection he offered to trade.
The germ of a future State, which began gradually to absorb other
similar centres, was thus laid. Lawyers, versed in the study of
Roman law, flocked into such centres; a tenacious and ambitious
race of men issued from among the burgesses, who equally hated
the naughtiness of the lords and what they called the lawlessness
of the peasants. The very forms of the village community, unknown
to their code, the very principles of federalism were repulsive
to them as "barbarian" inheritances. Caesarism, supported by the
fiction of popular consent and by the force of arms, was their
ideal, and they worked hard for those who promised to realize
it.(37)

The Christian Church, once a rebel against Roman law and now
its ally, worked in the same direction. The attempt at
constituting the theocratic Empire of Europe having proved a
failure, the more intelligent and ambitious bishops now yielded
support to those whom they reckoned upon for reconstituting the
power of the Kings of Israel or of the Emperors of
Constantinople. The Church bestowed upon the rising rulers her
sanctity, she crowned them as God's representatives on earth, she
brought to their service the learning and the statesmanship of
her ministers, her blessings and maledictions, her riches, and
the sympathies she had retained among the poor. The peasants,
whom the cities had failed or refused to free, on seeing the
burghers impotent to put an end to the interminable wars between
the knights--which wars they had so dearly to pay for--now
set their hopes upon the King, the Emperor, or the Great Prince;
and while aiding them to crush down the mighty feudal owners,
they aided them to constitute the centralized State. And finally,
the invasions of the Mongols and the Turks, the holy war against
the Maures in Spain, as well as the terrible wars which soon
broke out between the growing centres of sovereignty--Ile de
France and Burgundy, Scotland and England, England and France,
Lithuania and Poland, Moscow and Tver, and so on--contributed
to the same end. Mighty States made their appearance; and the
cities had now to resist not only loose federations of lords, but
strongly-organized centres, which had armies of serfs at their
disposal.

The worst was, that the growing autocracies found support in
the divisions which had grown within the cities themselves. The
fundamental idea of the medieval city was grand, but it was not
wide enough. Mutual aid and support cannot be limited to a small
association; they must spread to its surroundings, or else the
surroundings will absorb the association. And in this respect the
medieval citizen had committed a formidable mistake at the
outset. Instead of looking upon the peasants and artisans who
gathered under the protection of his walls as upon so many aids
who would contribute their part to the making of the city--as
they really did--a sharp division was traced between the
"families" of old burghers and the newcomers. For the former, all
benefits from communal trade and communal lands were reserved,
and nothing was left for the latter but the right of freely using
the skill of their own hands. The city thus became divided into
"the burghers" or "the commonalty," and "the inhabitants."(38)
The trade, which was formerly communal, now became the privilege
of the merchant and artisan "families," and the next step--that
of becoming individual, or the privilege of oppressive trusts--
was unavoidable.

The same division took place between the city proper and the
surrounding villages. The commune had well tried to free the
peasants, but her wars against the lords became, as already
mentioned, wars for freeing the city itself from the lords,
rather than for freeing the peasants. She left to the lord his
rights over the villeins, on condition that he would molest the
city no more and would become co-burgher. But the nobles
"adopted" by the city, and now residing within its walls, simply
carried on the old war within the very precincts of the city.
They disliked to submit to a tribunal of simple artisans and
merchants, and fought their old feuds in the streets. Each city
had now its Colonnas and Orsinis, its Overstolzes and Wises.
Drawing large incomes from the estates they had still retained,
they surrounded themselves with numerous clients and feudalized
the customs and habits of the city itself. And when discontent
began to be felt in the artisan classes of the town, they offered
their sword and their followers to settle the differences by a
free fight, instead of letting the discontent find out the
channels which it did not fail to secure itself in olden times.

The greatest and the most fatal error of most cities was to
base their wealth upon commerce and industry, to the neglect of
agriculture. They thus repeated the error which had once been
committed by the cities of antique Greece, and they fell through
it into the same crimes.(39) The estrangement of so many cities
from the land necessarily drew them into a policy hostile to the
land, which became more and more evident in the times of Edward
the Third,(40) the French Jacqueries, the Hussite wars, and the
Peasant War in Germany. On the other hand, a commercial policy
involved them in distant enterprises. Colonies were founded by
the Italians in the south-east, by German cities in the east, by
Slavonian cities in the far northeast. Mercenary armies began to
be kept for colonial wars, and soon for local defence as well.
Loans were contacted to such an extent as to totally demoralize
the citizens; and internal contests grew worse and worse at each
election, during which the colonial politics in the interest of a
few families was at stake. The division into rich and poor grew
deeper, and in the sixteenth century, in each city, the royal
authority found ready allies and support among the poor.

And there is yet another cause of the decay of communal
institutions, which stands higher and lies deeper than all the
above. The history of the medieval cities offers one of the most
striking illustrations of the power of ideas and principles upon
the destinies of mankind, and of the quite opposed results which
are obtained when a deep modification of leading ideas has taken
place. Self-reliance and federalism, the sovereignty of each
group, and the construction of the political body from the simple
to the composite, were the leading ideas in the eleventh century.
But since that time the conceptions had entirely changed. The
students of Roman law and the prelates of the Church, closely
bound together since the time of Innocent the Third, had
succeeded in paralyzing the idea--the antique Greek idea--
which presided at the foundation of the cities. For two or three
hundred years they taught from the pulpit, the University chair,
and the judges' bench, that salvation must be sought for in a
strongly-centralized State, placed under a semi-divine
authority;(41) that one man can and must be the saviour of
society, and that in the name of public salvation he can commit
any violence: burn men and women at the stake, make them perish
under indescribable tortures, plunge whole provinces into the
most abject misery. Nor did they fail to give object lessons to
this effect on a grand scale, and with an unheard-of cruelty,
wherever the king's sword and the Church's fire, or both at once,
could reach. By these teachings and examples, continually
repeated and enforced upon public attention, the very minds of
the citizens had been shaped into a new mould. They began to find
no authority too extensive, no killing by degrees too cruel, once
it was "for public safety." And, with this new direction of mind
and this new belief in one man's power, the old federalist
principle faded away, and the very creative genius of the masses
died out. The Roman idea was victorious, and in such
circumstances the centralized State had in the cities a ready
prey.

Florence in the fifteenth century is typical of this change.
Formerly a popular revolution was the signal of a new departure.
Now, when the people, brought to despair, insurged, it had
constructive ideas no more; no fresh idea came out of the
movement. A thousand representatives were put into the Communal
Council instead of 400; 100 men entered the signoria instead of
80. But a revolution of figures could be of no avail. The
people's discontent was growing up, and new revolts followed. A
saviour--the "tyran"--was appealed to; he massacred the
rebels, but the disintegration of the communal body continued
worse than ever. And when, after a new revolt, the people of
Florence appealed to their most popular man, Gieronimo
Savonarola, for advice, the monk's answer was:--"Oh, people
mine, thou knowest that I cannot go into State affairs... purify
thy soul, and if in such a disposition of mind thou reformest thy
city, then, people of Florence, thou shalt have inaugurated the
reform in all Italy!" Carnival masks and vicious books were
burned, a law of charity and another against usurers were passed--
and the democracy of Florence remained where it was. The old
spirit had gone. By too much trusting to government, they had
ceased to trust to themselves; they were unable to open new
issues. The State had only to step in and to crush down their
last liberties.

And yet, the current of mutual aid and support did not die
out in the masses, it continued to flow even after that defeat.
It rose up again with a formidable force, in answer to the
communist appeals of the first propagandists of the reform, and
it continued to exist even after the masses, having failed to
realize the life which they hoped to inaugurate under the
inspiration of a reformed religion, fell under the dominions of
an autocratic power. It flows still even now, and it seeks its
way to find out a new expression which would not be the State,
nor the medieval city, nor the village community of the
barbarians, nor the savage clan, but would proceed from all of
them, and yet be superior to them in its wider and more deeply
humane conceptions.

NOTES:

1. The literature of the subject is immense; but there is no work
yet which treats of the medieval city as of a whole. For the
French Communes, Augustin Thierry's Lettres and Considerations
sur l'histoire de France still remain classical, and Luchaire's
Communes francaises is an excellent addition on the same lines.
For the cities of Italy, the great work of Sismondi (Histoire des
republiques italiennes du moyen age, Paris, 1826, 16 vols.), Leo
and Botta's History of Italy, Ferrari's Revolutions d'Italie, and
Hegel's Geschichte der Stadteverfassung in Italien, are the chief
sources of general information. For Germany we have Maurer's
Stadteverfassung, Barthold's Geschichte der deutschen Stadte,
and, of recent works, Hegel's Stadte und Gilden der germanischen
Volker (2 vols. Leipzig, 1891), and Dr. Otto Kallsen's Die
deutschen Stadte im Mittelalter (2 vols. Halle, 1891), as also
Janssen's Geschichte des deutschen Volkes (5 vols. 1886), which,
let us hope, will soon be translated into English (French
translation in 1892). For Belgium, A. Wauters, Les Libertes
communales (Bruxelles, 1869-78, 3 vols.). For Russia, Byelaeff's,
Kostomaroff's and Sergievich's works. And finally, for England,
we posses one of the best works on cities of a wider region in
Mrs. J.R. Green's Town Life in the Fifteenth Century (2 vols.
London, 1894). We have, moreover, a wealth of well-known local
histories, and several excellent works of general or economical
history which I have so often mentioned in this and the preceding
chapter. The richness of literature consists, however, chiefly in
separate, sometimes admirable, researches into the history of
separate cities, especially Italian and German; the guilds; the
land question; the economical principles of the time. the
economical importance of guilds and crafts; the leagues between,
cities (the Hansa); and communal art. An incredible wealth of
information is contained in works of this second category, of
which only some of the more important are named in these pages.

2. Kulischer, in an excellent essay on primitive trade
(Zeitschrift fur Volkerpsychologie, Bd. x. 380), also points out
that, according to Herodotus, the Argippaeans were considered
inviolable, because the trade between the Scythians and the
northern tribes took place on their territory. A fugitive was
sacred on their territory, and they were often asked to act as
arbiters for their neighbours. See Appendix XI.

3. Some discussion has lately taken place upon the Weichbild and
the Weichbild-law, which still remain obscure (see Zopfl,
Alterthumer des deutschen Reichs und Rechts, iii. 29; Kallsen, i.
316). The above explanation seems to be the more probable, but,
of course, it must be tested by further research. It is also
evident that, to use a Scotch expression, the "mercet cross"
could be considered as an emblem of Church jurisdiction, but we
find it both in bishop cities and in those in which the folkmote
was sovereign.

4. For all concerning the merchant guild see Mr. Gross's
exhaustive work, The Guild Merchant (Oxford, 1890, 2 vols.); also
Mrs. Green's remarks in Town Life in the Fifteenth Century, vol.
ii. chaps. v. viii. x; and A. Doren's review of the subject in
Schmoller's Forschungen, vol. xii. If the considerations
indicated in the previous chapter (according to which trade was
communal at its beginnings) prove to be correct, it will be
permissible to suggest as a probable hypothesis that the guild
merchant was a body entrusted with commerce in the interest of
the whole city, and only gradually became a guild of merchants
trading for themselves; while the merchant adventurers of this
country, the Novgorod povolniki (free colonizers and merchants)
and the mercati personati, would be those to whom it was left to
open new markets and new branches of commerce for themselves.
Altogether, it must be remarked that the origin of the mediaeval
city can be ascribed to no separate agency. It was a result of
many agencies in different degrees.

5. Janssen's Geschichte des deutschen Volkes, i. 315; Gramich's
Wurzburg; and, in fact, any collection of ordinances.

6. Falke, Geschichtliche Statistik, i. 373-393, and ii. 66;
quoted in Janssen's Geschichte, i. 339; J.D. Blavignac, in
Comptes et depenses de la construction du clocher de
Saint-Nicolas a Fribourg en Suisse, comes to a similar conclusion.
For Amiens, De Calonne's Vie Municipale, p. 99 and Appendix. For
a thorough appreciation and graphical representation of the
medieval wages in England and their value in bread and meat,
see G. Steffen's excellent article and curves in The Nineteenth
Century for 1891, and Studier ofver lonsystemets historia i England,
Stockholm, 1895.

7. To quote but one example out of many which may be found in
Schonberg's and Falke's works, the sixteen shoemaker workers
(Schusterknechte) of the town Xanten, on the Rhine, gave, for
erecting a screen and an altar in the church, 75 guldens of
subscriptions, and 12 guldens out of their box, which money was
worth, according to the best valuations, ten times its present
value.

8. Quoted by Janssen, l.c. i. 343.

9. The Economical Interpretation of History, London, 1891, p.
303.

10. Janssen, l.c. See also Dr. Alwin Schultz, Deutsches Leben im
XIV und XV Jahrhundert, grosse Ausgabe, Wien, 1892, pp. 67 seq.
At Paris, the day of labour varied from seven to eight hours in
the winter to fourteen hours in summer in certain trades, while
in others it was from eight to nine hours in winter, to from ten
to twelve in Summer. All work was stopped on Saturdays and on
about twenty-five other days (jours de commun de vile foire) at
four o'clock, while on Sundays and thirty other holidays there
was no work at all. The general conclusion is, that the medieval
worker worked less hours, all taken, than the present-day worker
(Dr. E. Martin Saint-Leon, Histoire des corporations, p. 121).

11. W. Stieda, "Hansische Vereinbarungen uber stadtisches Gewerbe
im XIV und XV Jahrhundert," in Hansische Geschichtsblatter,
Jahrgang 1886, p. 121. Schonberg's Wirthschaftliche Bedeutung der
Zunfte; also, partly, Roscher.

12. See Toulmin Smith's deeply-felt remarks about the royal
spoliation of the guilds, in Miss Smith's Introduction to English
Guilds. In France the same royal spoliation and abolition of the
guilds' jurisdiction was begun from 1306, and the final blow was
struck in 1382 (Fagniez, l.c. pp. 52-54).

13. Adam Smith and his contemporaries knew well what they were
condemning when they wrote against the State interference in
trade and the trade monopolies of State creation. Unhappily,
their followers, with their hopeless superficiality, flung
medieval guilds and State interference into the same sack, making
no distinction between a Versailles edict and a guild ordinance.
It hardly need be said that the economists who have seriously
studied the subject, like Schonberg (the editor of the well-known
course of Political Economy), never fell into such an error. But,
till lately, diffuse discussions of the above type went on for
economical "science."

14. In Florence the seven minor arts made their revolution in
1270-82, and its results are fully described by Perrens (Histoire
de Florence, Paris, 1877, 3 vols.), and especially by Gino
Capponi (Storia della repubblica di Firenze, 2da edizione, 1876,
i. 58-80; translated into German). In Lyons, on the contrary,
where the movement of the minor crafts took place in 1402, the
latter were defeated and lost the right of themselves nominating
their own judges. The two parties came apparently to a
compromise. In Rostock the same movement took place in 1313; in
Zurich in 1336; in Bern in 1363; in Braunschweig in 1374, and
next year in Hamburg; in Lubeck in 1376-84; and so on. See
Schmoller's Strassburg zur Zeit der Zunftkampfe and Strassburg's
Bluthe; Brentano's Arbeitergilden der Gegenwart, 2 vols.,
Leipzig, 1871-72; Eb. Bain's Merchant and Craft Guilds, Aberdeen,
1887, pp. 26-47, 75, etc. As to Mr. Gross's opinion relative to
the same struggles in England, see Mrs. Green's remarks in her
Town Life in the Fifteenth Century, ii. 190-217; also the chapter
on the Labour Question, and, in fact, the whole of this extremely
interesting volume. Brentano's views on the crafts' struggles,
expressed especially in iii. and iv. of his essay "On the History
and Development of Guilds," in Toulmin Smith's English Guilds
remain classical for the subject, and may be said to have been
again and again confirmed by subsequent research.

15. To give but one example--Cambrai made its first revolution
in 907, and, after three or four more revolts, it obtained its
charter in 1O76. This charter was repealed twice (11O7 and 1138),
and twice obtained again (in 1127 and 1180). Total, 223 years of
struggles before conquering the right to independence. Lyons--
from 1195 to 1320.

16. See Tuetey, "Etude sur Le droit municipal... en
Franche-Comte," in Memoires de la Societe d'emulation de
Montbeliard, 2e serie, ii. 129 seq.

17. This seems to have been often the case in Italy. In
Switzerland, Bern bought even the towns of Thun and Burgdorf.

18. Such was, at least, the case in the cities of Tuscany
(Florence, Lucca, Sienna, Bologna, etc.), for which the relations
between city and peasants are best known. (Luchitzkiy, "Slavery
and Russian Slaves in Florence," in Kieff University Izvestia for
1885, who has perused Rumohr's Ursprung der Besitzlosigkeit der
Colonien in Toscana, 1830.) The whole matter concerning the
relations between the cities and the peasants requires much more
study than has hitherto been done.

19. Ferrari's generalizations are often too theoretical to be
always correct; but his views upon the part played by the nobles
in the city wars are based upon a wide range of authenticated
facts.

20. Only such cities as stubbornly kept to the cause of the
barons, like Pisa or Verona, lost through the wars. For many
towns which fought on the barons' side, the defeat was also the
beginning of liberation and progress.

21. Ferrari, ii. 18, 104 seq.; Leo and Botta, i. 432.

22. Joh. Falke, Die Hansa als Deutsche Seeund Handelsmacht,
Berlin, 1863, pp. 31, 55.

23. For Aachen and Cologne we have direct testimony that the
bishops of these two cities--one of them bought by the enemy
opened to him the gates.

24. See the facts, though not always the conclusions, of Nitzsch,
iii. 133 seq.; also Kallsen, i. 458, etc.

25. On the Commune of the Laonnais, which, until Melleville's
researches (Histoire de la Commune du Laonnais, Paris, 1853), was
confounded with the Commune of Laon, see Luchaire, pp. 75 seq.
For the early peasants' guilds and subsequent unions see R.
Wilman's "Die landlichen Schutzgilden Westphaliens," in
Zeitschrift fur Kulturgeschichte, neue Folge, Bd. iii., quoted in
Henne-am-Rhyn's Kulturgeschichte, iii. 249.

26. Luchaire, p. 149.

27. Two important cities, like Mainz and Worms, would settle a
political contest by means of arbitration. After a civil war
broken out in Abbeville, Amiens would act, in 1231, as arbiter
(Luchaire, 149); and so on.

28. See, for instance, W. Stieda, Hansische Vereinbarungen, l.c.,
p.114.

29. Cosmo Innes's Early Scottish History and Scotland in Middle
Ages, quoted by Rev. Denton, l.c., pp. 68, 69; Lamprecht's
Deutsches wirthschaftliche Leben im Mittelalter, review by
Schmoller in his Jahrbuch, Bd. xii.; Sismondi's Tableau de
l'agriculture toscane, pp. 226 seq. The dominions of Florence
could be recognized at a glance through their prosperity.

30. Mr. John J. Ennett (Six Essays, London, 1891) has excellent
pages on this aspect of medieval architecture. Mr. Willis, in his
appendix to Whewell's History of Inductive Sciences (i. 261-262),
has pointed out the beauty of the mechanical relations in
medieval buildings. "A new decorative construction was matured,"
he writes, "not thwarting and controlling, but assisting and
harmonizing with the mechanical construction. Every member, every
moulding, becomes a sustainer of weight; and by the multiplicity
of props assisting each other, and the consequent subdivision of
weight, the eye was satisfied of the stability of the structure,
notwithstanding curiously slender aspects of the separate parts."
An art which sprang out of the social life of the city could not
be better characterized.

31. Dr. L. Ennen, Der Dom zu Koln, seine Construction und
Anstaltung, Koln, 1871.

32. The three statues are among the outer decorations of Notre
Dame de Paris.

33. Mediaeval art, like Greek art, did not know those curiosity
shops which we call a National Gallery or a Museum. A picture was
painted, a statue was carved, a bronze decoration was cast to
stand in its proper place in a monument of communal art. It lived
there, it was part of a whole, and it contributed to give unity
to the impression produced by the whole.

34. Cf. J. T. Ennett's "Second Essay," p. 36.

35. Sismondi, iv. 172; xvi. 356. The great canal, Naviglio
Grande, which brings the water from the Tessino, was begun in
1179, i.e. after the conquest of independence, and it was ended
in the thirteenth century. On the subsequent decay, see xvi. 355.

36. In 1336 it had 8,000 to 10,000 boys and girls in its primary
schools, 1,000 to 1,200 boys in its seven middle schools, and
from 550 to 600 students in its four universities. The thirty
communal hospitals contained over 1,000 beds for a population of
90,000 inhabitants (Capponi, ii. 249 seq.). It has more than once
been suggested by authoritative writers that education stood, as
a rule, at a much higher level than is generally supposed.
Certainly so in democratic Nuremberg.

37. Cf. L. Ranke's excellent considerations upon the essence of
Roman Law in his Weltgeschichte, Bd. iv. Abth. 2, pp. 20-31. Also
Sismondi's remarks upon the part played by the legistes in the
constitution of royal authority, Histoire des Francais, Paris,
1826, viii. 85-99. The popular hatred against these "weise
Doktoren und Beutelschneider des Volks" broke out with full force
in the first years of the sixteenth century in the sermons of the
early Reform movement.

38. Brentano fully understood the fatal effects of the struggle
between the "old burghers" and the new-comers. Miaskowski, in his
work on the village communities of Switzerland, has indicated the
same for village communities.

39. The trade in slaves kidnapped in the East was never
discontinued in the Italian republics till the fifteenth century.
Feeble traces of it are found also in Germany and elsewhere. See
Cibrario. Della schiavitu e del servaggio, 2 vols. Milan, 1868;
Professor Luchitzkiy, "Slavery and Russian Slaves in Florence in
the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries," in Izvestia of the Kieff
University, 1885.

40. J.R. Green's History of the English People, London, 1878, i.
455.

41. See the theories expressed by the Bologna lawyers, already at
the Congress of Roncaglia in 1158.






CHAPTER VII

MUTUAL AID AMONGST OURSELVES

Popular revolts at the beginning of the State-period. Mutual
Aid institutions of the present time. The village community;
its struggles for resisting its abolition by the State. Habits
derived from the village-community life, retained in our modern
villages. Switzerland, France, Germany, Russia.





The mutual-aid tendency in man has so remote an origin, and
is so deeply interwoven with all the past evolution of the human
race, that it has been maintained by mankind up to the present
time, notwithstanding all vicissitudes of history. It was chiefly
evolved during periods of peace and prosperity; but when even the
greatest calamities befell men--when whole countries were laid
waste by wars, and whole populations were decimated by misery, or
groaned under the yoke of tyranny--the same tendency continued
to live in the villages and among the poorer classes in the
towns; it still kept them together, and in the long run it
reacted even upon those ruling, fighting, and devastating
minorities which dismissed it as sentimental nonsense. And
whenever mankind had to work out a new social organization,
adapted to a new phasis of development, its constructive genius
always drew the elements and the inspiration for the new
departure from that same ever-living tendency. New economical and
social institutions, in so far as they were a creation of the
masses, new ethical systems, and new religions, all have
originated from the same source, and the ethical progress of our
race, viewed in its broad lines, appears as a gradual extension
of the mutual-aid principles from the tribe to always larger and
larger agglomerations, so as to finally embrace one day the whole
of mankind, without respect to its divers creeds, languages, and
races.

After having passed through the savage tribe, and next
through the village community, the Europeans came to work out in
medieval times a new form of organization, which had the
advantage of allowing great latitude for individual initiative,
while it largely responded at the same time to man's need of
mutual support. A federation of village communities, covered by a
network of guilds and fraternities, was called into existence in
the medieval cities. The immense results achieved under this new
form of union--in well-being for all, in industries, art,
science, and commerce--were discussed at some length in two
preceding chapters, and an attempt was also made to show why,
towards the end of the fifteenth century, the medieval republics--
surrounded by domains of hostile feudal lords, unable to free
the peasants from servitude, and gradually corrupted by ideas of
Roman Caesarism--were doomed to become a prey to the growing
military States.

However, before submitting for three centuries to come, to
the all-absorbing authority of the State, the masses of the
people made a formidable attempt at reconstructing society on the
old basis of mutual aid and support. It is well known by this
time that the great movement of the reform was not a mere revolt
against the abuses of the Catholic Church. It had its
constructive ideal as well, and that ideal was life in free,
brotherly communities. Those of the early writings and sermons of
the period which found most response with the masses were imbued
with ideas of the economical and social brotherhood of mankind.
The "Twelve Articles" and similar professions of faith, which
were circulated among the German and Swiss peasants and artisans,
maintained not only every one's right to interpret the Bible
according to his own understanding, but also included the demand
of communal lands being restored to the village communities and
feudal servitudes being abolished, and they always alluded to the
"true" faith--a faith of brotherhood. At the same time scores
of thousands of men and women joined the communist fraternities
of Moravia, giving them all their fortune and living in numerous
and prosperous settlements constructed upon the principles of
communism.(1) Only wholesale massacres by the thousand could put
a stop to this widely-spread popular movement, and it was by the
sword, the fire, and the rack that the young States secured their
first and decisive victory over the masses of the people.(2)

For the next three centuries the States, both on the
Continent and in these islands, systematically weeded out all
institutions in which the mutual-aid tendency had formerly found
its expression. The village communities were bereft of their
folkmotes, their courts and independent administration; their
lands were confiscated. The guilds were spoliated of their
possessions and liberties, and placed under the control, the
fancy, and the bribery of the State's official. The cities were
divested of their sovereignty, and the very springs of their
inner life--the folkmote, the elected justices and
administration, the sovereign parish and the sovereign guild--
were annihilated; the State's functionary took possession of
every link of what formerly was an organic whole. Under that
fatal policy and the wars it engendered, whole regions, once
populous and wealthy, were laid bare; rich cities became
insignificant boroughs; the very roads which connected them with
other cities became impracticable. Industry, art, and knowledge
fell into decay. Political education, science, and law were
rendered subservient to the idea of State centralization. It was
taught in the Universities and from the pulpit that the
institutions in which men formerly used to embody their needs of
mutual support could not be tolerated in a properly organized
State; that the State alone could represent the bonds of union
between its subjects; that federalism and "particularism" were
the enemies of progress, and the State was the only proper
initiator of further development. By the end of the last century
the kings on the Continent, the Parliament in these isles, and
the revolutionary Convention in France, although they were at war
with each other, agreed in asserting that no separate unions
between citizens must exist within the State; that hard labour
and death were the only suitable punishments to workers who dared
to enter into "coalitions." "No state within the State!" The
State alone, and the State's Church, must take care of matters of
general interest, while the subjects must represent loose
aggregations of individuals, connected by no particular bonds,
bound to appeal to the Government each time that they feel a
common need. Up to the middle of this century this was the theory
and practice in Europe. Even commercial and industrial societies
were looked at with suspicion. As to the workers, their unions
were treated as unlawful almost within our own lifetime in this
country and within the last twenty years on the Continent. The
whole system of our State education was such that up to the
present time, even in this country, a notable portion of society
would treat as a revolutionary measure the concession of such
rights as every one, freeman or serf, exercised five hundred
years ago in the village folkmote, the guild, the parish, and the
city.

The absorption of all social functions by the State
necessarily favoured the development of an unbridled, narrow-minded
individualism. In proportion as the obligations towards the State
grew in numbers the citizens were evidently relieved from their
obligations towards each other. In the guild--and in medieval
times every man belonged to some guild or fraternity two "brothers"
were bound to watch in turns a brother who had fallen ill; it
would be sufficient now to give one's neighbour the address of
the next paupers' hospital. In barbarian society, to assist at a
fight between two men, arisen from a quarrel, and not to prevent
it from taking a fatal issue, meant to be oneself treated as a
murderer; but under the theory of the all-protecting State the
bystander need not intrude: it is the policeman's business to
interfere, or not. And while in a savage land, among the Hottentots,
it would be scandalous to eat without having loudly called out
thrice whether there is not somebody wanting to share the food,
all that a respectable citizen has to do now is to pay the poor
tax and to let the starving starve. The result is, that the
theory which maintains that men can, and must, seek their own
happiness in a disregard of other people's wants is now triumphant
all round in law, in science, in religion. It is the religion
of the day, and to doubt of its efficacy is to be a dangerous
Utopian. Science loudly proclaims that the struggle of each
against all is the leading principle of nature, and of human
societies as well. To that struggle Biology ascribes the
progressive evolution of the animal world. History takes the same
line of argument; and political economists, in their naive ignorance,
trace all progress of modern industry and machinery to the "wonderful"
effects of the same principle. The very religion of the pulpit is
a religion of individualism, slightly mitigated by more or less
charitable relations to one's neighbours, chiefly on Sundays.
"Practical" men and theorists, men of science and religious
preachers, lawyers and politicians, all agree upon one thing--
that individualism may be more or less softened in its harshest
effects by charity, but that it is the only secure basis for the
maintenance of society and its ulterior progress.

It seems, therefore, hopeless to look for mutual-aid
institutions and practices in modern society. What could remain
of them? And yet, as soon as we try to ascertain how the millions
of human beings live, and begin to study their everyday
relations, we are struck with the immense part which the
mutual-aid and mutual-support principles play even now-a-days in
human life. Although the destruction of mutual-aid institutions
has been going on in practice and theory, for full three or four
hundred years, hundreds of millions of men continue to live under
such institutions; they piously maintain them and endeavour to
reconstitute them where they have ceased to exist. In our mutual
relations every one of us has his moments of revolt against the
fashionable individualistic creed of the day, and actions in
which men are guided by their mutual aid inclinations constitute
so great a part of our daily intercourse that if a stop to such
actions could be put all further ethical progress would be
stopped at once. Human society itself could not be maintained for
even so much as the lifetime of one single generation. These
facts, mostly neglected by sociologists and yet of the first
importance for the life and further elevation of mankind, we are
now going to analyze, beginning with the standing institutions of
mutual support, and passing next to those acts of mutual aid
which have their origin in personal or social sympathies.

When we cast a broad glance on the present constitution of
European society we are struck at once with the fact that,
although so much has been done to get rid of the village
community, this form of union continues to exist to the extent we
shall presently see, and that many attempts are now made either
to reconstitute it in some shape or another or to find some
substitute for it. The current theory as regards the village
community is, that in Western Europe it has died out by a natural
death, because the communal possession of the soil was found
inconsistent with the modern requirements of agriculture. But the
truth is that nowhere did the village community disappear of its
own accord; everywhere, on the contrary, it took the ruling
classes several centuries of persistent but not always successful
efforts to abolish it and to confiscate the communal lands.

In France, the village communities began to be deprived of
their independence, and their lands began to be plundered, as
early as the sixteenth century. However, it was only in the next
century, when the mass of the peasants was brought, by exactions
and wars, to the state of subjection and misery which is vividly
depicted by all historians, that the plundering of their lands
became easy and attained scandalous proportions. "Every one has
taken of them according to his powers... imaginary debts have
been claimed, in order to seize upon their lands; "so we read in
an edict promulgated by Louis the Fourteenth in 1667.(3) Of
course the State's remedy for such evils was to render the
communes still more subservient to the State, and to plunder them
itself. in fact, two years later all money revenue of the
communes was confiscated by the King. As to the appropriation of
communal lands, it grew worse and worse, and in the next century
the nobles and the clergy had already taken possession of immense
tracts of land--one-half of the cultivated area, according to
certain estimates--mostly to let it go out of culture.(4) But
the peasants still maintained their communal institutions, and
until the year 1787 the village folkmotes, composed of all
householders, used to come together in the shadow of the
bell-tower or a tree, to allot and re-allot what they had
retained of their fields, to assess the taxes, and to elect their
executive, just as the Russian mir does at the present time. This
is what Babeau's researches have proved to demonstration.(5)

The Government found, however, the folkmotes "too noisy," too
disobedient, and in 1787, elected councils, composed of a mayor
and three to six syndics, chosen from among the wealthier
peasants, were introduced instead. Two years later the
Revolutionary Assemblee Constituante, which was on this point at
one with the old regime, fully confirmed this law (on the 14th of
December, 1789), and the bourgeois du village had now their turn
for the plunder of communal lands, which continued all through
the Revolutionary period. Only on the 16th of August, 1792, the
Convention, under the pressure of the peasants' insurrections,
decided to return the enclosed lands to the communes;(6) but it
ordered at the same time that they should be divided in equal
parts among the wealthier peasants only--a measure which
provoked new insurrections and was abrogated next year, in 1793,
when the order came to divide the communal lands among. all
commoners, rich and poor alike, "active" and "inactive."

These two laws, however, ran so much against the conceptions
of the peasants that they were not obeyed, and wherever the
peasants had retaken possession of part of their lands they kept
them undivided. But then came the long years of wars, and the
communal lands were simply confiscated by the State (in 1794) as
a mortgage for State loans, put up for sale, and plundered as
such; then returned again to the communes and confiscated again
(in 1813); and only in 1816 what remained of them, i.e. about
15,000,000 acres of the least productive land, was restored to
the village communities.(7) Still this was not yet the end of
the troubles of the communes. Every new regime saw in the
communal lands a means for gratifying its supporters, and three
laws (the first in 1837 and the last under Napoleon the Third)
were passed to induce the village communities to divide their
estates. Three times these laws had to be repealed, in
consequence of the opposition they met with in the villages; but
something was snapped up each time, and Napoleon the Third, under
the pretext of encouraging perfected methods of agriculture,
granted large estates out of the communal lands to some of his
favourites.

As to the autonomy of the village communities, what could be
retained of it after so many blows? The mayor and the syndics
were simply looked upon as unpaid functionaries of the State
machinery. Even now, under the Third Republic, very little can be
done in a village community without the huge State machinery, up
to the prefet and the ministries, being set in motion. It is
hardly credible, and yet it is true, that when, for instance, a
peasant intends to pay in money his share in the repair of a
communal road, instead of himself breaking the necessary amount
of stones, no fewer than twelve different functionaries of the
State must give their approval, and an aggregate of fifty-two
different acts must be performed by them, and exchanged between
them, before the peasant is permitted to pay that money to the
communal council. All the remainder bears the same character.(8)

What took place in France took place everywhere in Western
and Middle Europe. Even the chief dates of the great assaults
upon the peasant lands are the same. For England the only
difference is that the spoliation was accomplished by separate
acts rather than by general sweeping measures--with less haste
but more thoroughly than in France. The seizure of the communal
lands by the lords also began in the fifteenth century, after the
defeat of the peasant insurrection of 1380--as seen from
Rossus's Historia and from a statute of Henry the Seventh, in
which these seizures are spoken of under the heading of
"enormitees and myschefes as be hurtfull... to the common
wele."(9) Later on the Great Inquest, under Henry the Eighth,
was begun, as is known, in order to put a stop to the enclosure
of communal lands, but it ended in a sanction of what had been
done.(10) The communal lands continued to be preyed upon, and
the peasants were driven from the land. But it was especially
since the middle of the eighteenth century that, in England as
everywhere else, it became part of a systematic policy to simply
weed out all traces of communal ownership; and the wonder is not
that it has disappeared, but that it could be maintained, even in
England, so as to be "generally prevalent so late as the
grandfathers of this generation."(11) The very object of the
Enclosure Acts, as shown by Mr. Seebohm, was to remove this
system,(12) and it was so well removed by the nearly four
thousand Acts passed between 1760 and 1844 that only faint traces
of it remain now. The land of the village communities was taken
by the lords, and the appropriation was sanctioned by Parliament
in each separate case.

In Germany, in Austria, in Belgium the village community was
also destroyed by the State. Instances of commoners themselves
dividing their lands were rare,(13) while everywhere the States
coerced them to enforce the division, or simply favoured the
private appropriation of their lands. The last blow to communal
ownership in Middle Europe also dates from the middle of the
eighteenth century. In Austria sheer force was used by the
Government, in 1768, to compel the communes to divide their lands--
a special commission being nominated two years later for that
purpose. In Prussia Frederick the Second, in several of his
ordinances (in 1752, 1763, 1765, and 1769), recommended to the
Justizcollegien to enforce the division. In Silesia a special
resolution was issued to serve that aim in 1771. The same took
place in Belgium, and, as the communes did not obey, a law was
issued in 1847 empowering the Government to buy communal meadows
in order to sell them in retail, and to make a forced sale of the
communal land when there was a would-be buyer for it.(14)

In short, to speak of the natural death of the village
communities in virtue of economical laws is as grim a joke as to
speak of the natural death of soldiers slaughtered on a
battlefield. The fact was simply this: The village communities
had lived for over a thousand years; and where and when the
peasants were not ruined by wars and exactions they steadily
improved their methods of culture. But as the value of land was
increasing, in consequence of the growth of industries, and the
nobility had acquired, under the State organization, a power
which it never had had under the feudal system, it took
possession of the best parts of the communal lands, and did its
best to destroy the communal institutions.

However, the village-community institutions so well respond
to the needs and conceptions of the tillers of the soil that, in
spite of all, Europe is up to this date covered with living
survivals of the village communities, and European country life
is permeated with customs and habits dating from the community
period. Even in England, notwithstanding all the drastic measures
taken against the old order of things, it prevailed as late as
the beginning of the nineteenth century. Mr. Gomme--one of the
very few English scholars who have paid attention to the subject--
shows in his work that many traces of the communal possession
of the soil are found in Scotland, "runrig" tenancy having been
maintained in Forfarshire up to 1813, while in certain villages
of Inverness the custom was, up to 1801, to plough the land for
the whole community, without leaving any boundaries, and to allot
it after the ploughing was done. In Kilmorie the allotment and
re-allotment of the fields was in full vigour "till the last
twenty-five years," and the Crofters' Commission found it still
in vigour in certain islands.(15) In Ireland the system
prevailed up to the great famine; and as to England, Marshall's
works, which passed unnoticed until Nasse and Sir Henry Maine
drew attention to them, leave no doubt as to the
village-community system having been widely spread, in nearly all
English counties, at the beginning of the nineteenth
century.(16) No more than twenty years ago Sir Henry Maine was
"greatly surprised at the number of instances of abnormal
property rights, necessarily implying the former existence of
collective ownership and joint cultivation," which a
comparatively brief inquiry brought under his notice.(17) And,
communal institutions having persisted so late as that, a great
number of mutual-aid habits and customs would undoubtedly be
discovered in English villages if the writers of this country
only paid attention to village life.(18)

As to the Continent, we find the communal institutions fully
alive in many parts of France, Switzerland, Germany, Italy, the
Scandinavian lands, and Spain, to say nothing of Eastern Europe;
the village life in these countries is permeated with communal
habits and customs; and almost every year the Continental
literature is enriched by serious works dealing with this and
connected subjects. I must, therefore, limit my illustrations to
the most typical instances. Switzerland is undoubtedly one of
them. Not only the five republics of Uri, Schwytz, Appenzell,
Glarus, and Unterwalden hold their lands as undivided estates,
and are governed by their popular folkmotes, but in all other
cantons too the village communities remain in possession of a
wide self-government, and own large parts of the Federal
territory.(19) Two-thirds of all the Alpine meadows and
two-thirds of all the forests of Switzerland are until now
communal land; and a considerable number of fields, orchards,
vineyards, peat bogs, quarries, and so on, are owned in common.
In the Vaud, where all the householders continue to take part in
the deliberations of their elected communal councils, the
communal spirit is especially alive. Towards the end of the
winter all the young men of each village go to stay a few days in
the woods, to fell timber and to bring it down the steep slopes
tobogganing way, the timber and the fuel wood being divided among
all households or sold for their benefit. These excursions are
real fetes of manly labour. On the banks of Lake Leman part of
the work required to keep up the terraces of the vineyards is
still done in common; and in the spring, when the thermometer
threatens to fall below zero before sunrise, the watchman wakes
up all householders, who light fires of straw and dung and
protect their vine-trees from the frost by an artificial cloud.
In nearly all cantons the village communities possess so-called.
Burgernutzen--that is, they hold in common a number of cows, in
order to supply each family with butter; or they keep communal
fields or vineyards, of which the produce is divided between the
burghers, or they rent their land for the benefit of the
community.(20)

It may be taken as a rule that where the communes have
retained a wide sphere of functions, so as to be living parts of
the national organism, and where they have not been reduced to
sheer misery, they never fail to take good care of their lands.
Accordingly the communal estates in Switzerland strikingly
contrast with the miserable state of "commons" in this country.
The communal forests in the Vaud and the Valais are admirably
managed, in conformity with the rules of modern forestry.
Elsewhere the "strips" of communal fields, which change owners
under the system of re-allotment, are very well manured,
especially as there is no lack of meadows and cattle. The high
level meadows are well kept as a rule, and the rural roads are
excellent.(21) And when we admire the Swiss chalet, the mountain
road, the peasants' cattle, the terraces of vineyards, or the
school-house in Switzer land, we must keep in mind that without
the timber for the chalet being taken from the communal woods and
the stone from the communal quarries, without the cows being kept
on the communal meadows, and the roads being made and the
school-houses built by communal work, there would be little to
admire.

It hardly need be said that a great number of mutual-aid
habits and customs continue to persist in the Swiss villages. The
evening gatherings for shelling walnuts, which take place in
turns in each household; the evening parties for sewing the dowry
of the girl who is going to marry; the calling of "aids" for
building the houses and taking in the crops, as well as for all
sorts of work which may be required by one of the commoners; the
custom of exchanging children from one canton to the other, in
order to make them learn two languages, French and German; and so
on--all these are quite habitual;(22) while, on the other
side, divers modern requirements are met in the same spirit. Thus
in Glarus most of the Alpine meadows have been sold during a time
of calamity; but the communes still continue to buy field land,
and after the newly-bought fields have been left in the
possession of separate commoners for ten, twenty, or thirty
years, as the case might be, they return to the common stock,
which is re-allotted according to the needs of all. A great
number of small associations are formed to produce some of the
necessaries for life--bread, cheese, and wine--by common
work, be it only on a limited scale; and agricultural
co-operation altogether spreads in Switzerland with the greatest
ease. Associations formed between ten to thirty peasants, who buy
meadows and fields in common, and cultivate them as co-owners,
are of common occurrence; while dairy associations for the sale
of milk, butter, and cheese are organized everywhere. In fact,
Switzerland was the birthplace of that form of co-operation. It
offers, moreover, an immense field for the study of all sorts of
small and large societies, formed for the satisfaction of all
sorts of modern wants. In certain parts of Switzerland one finds
in almost every village a number of associations--for
protection from fire, for boating, for maintaining the quays on
the shores of a lake, for the supply of water, and so on; and the
country is covered with societies of archers, sharpshooters,
topographers, footpath explorers, and the like, originated from
modern militarism.

Switzerland is, however, by no means an exception in Europe,
because the same institutions and habits are found in the
villages of France, of Italy, of Germany, of Denmark, and so on.
We have just seen what has been done by the rulers of France in
order to destroy the village community and to get hold of its
lands; but notwithstanding all that one-tenth part of the whole
territory available for culture, i.e. 13,500,000 acres, including
one-half of all the natural meadows and nearly a fifth part of
all the forests of the country, remain in communal possession.
The woods supply the communers with fuel, and the timber wood is
cut, mostly by communal work, with all desirable regularity; the
grazing lands are free for the commoners' cattle; and what
remains of communal fields is allotted and re-allotted in certain
parts Ardennes--in the usual of France--namely, in the
way.(23)

These additional sources of supply, which aid the poorer
peasants to pass through a year of bad crops without parting with
their small plots of land and without running into irredeemable
debts, have certainly their importance for both the agricultural
labourers and the nearly three millions of small peasant
proprietors. It is even doubtful whether small peasant
proprietorship could be maintained without these additional
resources. But the ethical importance of the communal
possessions, small as they are, is still greater than their
economical value. They maintain in village life a nucleus of
customs and habits of mutual aid which undoubtedly acts as a
mighty check upon the development of reckless individualism and
greediness, which small land-ownership is only too prone to
develop. Mutual aid in all possible circumstances of village life
is part of the routine life in all parts of the country.
Everywhere we meet, under different names, with the charroi, i.e.
the free aid of the neighbours for taking in a crop, for vintage,
or for building a house; everywhere we find the same evening
gatherings as have just been mentioned in Switzerland; and
everywhere the commoners associate for all sorts of work. Such
habits are mentioned by nearly all those who have written upon
French village life. But it will perhaps be better to give in
this place some abstracts from letters which I have just received
from a friend of mine whom I have asked to communicate to me his
observations on this subject. They come from an aged man who for
years has been the mayor of his commune in South France (in
Ariege); the facts he mentions are known to him from long years
of personal observation, and they have the advantage of coming
from one neighbourhood instead of being skimmed from a large
area. Some of them may seem trifling, but as a whole they depict
quite a little world of village life.

"In several communes in our neighbourhood," my friend writes,
"the old custom of l'emprount is in vigour. When many hands are
required in a metairie for rapidly making some work--dig out
potatoes or mow the grass--the youth of the neighbourhood is
convoked; young men and girls come in numbers, make it gaily and
for nothing. and in the evening, after a gay meal, they dance.

"In the same communes, when a girl is going to marry, the
girls of the neighbourhood come to aid in sewing the dowry. In
several communes the women still continue to spin a good deal.
When the winding off has to be done in a family it is done in one
evening--all friends being convoked for that work. In many
communes of the Ariege and other parts of the south-west the
shelling of the Indian corn-sheaves is also done by all the
neighbours. They are treated with chestnuts and wine, and the
young people dance after the work has been done. The same custom
is practised for making nut oil and crushing hemp. In the commune
of L. the same is done for bringing in the corn crops. These days
of hard work become fete days, as the owner stakes his honour on
serving a good meal. No remuneration is given; all do it for each
other.(24)

"In the commune of S. the common grazing-land is every year
increased, so that nearly the whole of the land of the commune is
now kept in common. The shepherds are elected by all owners of
the cattle, including women. The bulls are communal.

"In the commune of M. the forty to fifty small sheep flocks
of the commoners are brought together and divided into three or
four flocks before being sent to the higher meadows. Each owner
goes for a week to serve as shepherd.

"In the hamlet of C. a threshing machine has been bought in
common by several households; the fifteen to twenty persons
required to serve the machine being supplied by all the families.
Three other threshing machines have been bought and are rented
out by their owners, but the work is performed by outside
helpers, invited in the usual way.

"In our commune of R. we had to raise the wall of the
cemetery. Half of the money which was required for buying lime
and for the wages of the skilled workers was supplied by the
county council, and the other half by subscription. As to the
work of carrying sand and water, making mortar, and serving the
masons, it was done entirely by volunteers [just as in the Kabyle
djemmaa]. The rural roads were repaired in the same way, by
volunteer days of work given by the commoners. Other communes
have built in the same way their fountains. The wine-press and
other smaller appliances are frequently kept by the commune."

Two residents of the same neighbourhood, questioned by my
friend, add the following:--

"At O. a few years ago there was no mill. The commune has
built one, levying a tax upon the commoners. As to the miller,
they decided, in order to avoid frauds and partiality, that he
should be paid two francs for each bread-eater, and the corn be
ground free.

"At St. G. few peasants are insured against fire. When a
conflagration has taken place--so it was lately--all give
something to the family which has suffered from it--a chaldron,
a bed-cloth, a chair, and so on--and a modest household is thus
reconstituted. All the neighbours aid to build the house, and in
the meantime the family is lodged free by the neighbours."

Such habits of mutual support--of which many more examples
could be given--undoubtedly account for the easiness with which
the French peasants associate for using, in turn, the plough with
its team of horses, the wine-press, and the threshing machine,
when they are kept in the village by one of them only, as well as
for the performance of all sorts of rural work in common. Canals
were maintained, forests were cleared, trees were planted, and
marshes were drained by the village communities from time
immemorial; and the same continues still. Quite lately, in La
Borne of Lozere barren hills were turned into rich gardens by
communal work. "The soil was brought on men's backs; terraces
were made and planted with chestnut trees, peach trees, and
orchards, and water was brought for irrigation in canals two or
three miles long." Just now they have dug a new canal, eleven
miles in length.(25)

To the same spirit is also due the remarkable success lately
obtained by the syndicats agricoles, or peasants' and farmers'
associations. It was not until 1884 that associations of more
than nineteen persons were permitted in France, and I need not
say that when this "dangerous experiment" was ventured upon--so
it was styled in the Chambers--all due "precautions" which
functionaries can invent were taken. Notwithstanding all that,
France begins to be covered with syndicates. At the outset they
were only formed for buying manures and seeds, falsification
having attained colossal proportions in these two branches;(26)
but gradually they extended their functions in various
directions, including the sale of agricultural produce and
permanent improvements of the land. In South France the ravages
of the phylloxera have called into existence a great number of
wine-growers' associations. Ten to thirty growers form a
syndicate, buy a steam-engine for pumping water, and make the
necessary arrangements for inundating their vineyards in
turn.(27) New associations for protecting the land from
inundations, for irrigation purposes, and for maintaining canals
are continually formed, and the unanimity of all peasants of a
neighbourhood, which is required by law, is no obstacle.
Elsewhere we have the fruitieres, or dairy associations, in some
of which all butter and cheese is divided in equal parts,
irrespective of the yield of each cow. In the Ariege we find an
association of eight separate communes for the common culture of
their lands, which they have put together; syndicates for free
medical aid have been formed in 172 communes out of 337 in the
same department; associations of consumers arise in connection
with the syndicates; and so on.(28) "Quite a revolution is going
on in our villages," Alfred Baudrillart writes, "through these
associations, which take in each region their own special
characters."

Very much the same must be said of Germany. Wherever the
peasants could resist the plunder of their lands, they have
retained them in communal ownership, which largely prevails in
Wurttemberg, Baden, Hohenzollern, and in the Hessian province of
Starkenberg.(29) The communal forests are kept, as a rule, in an
excellent state, and in thousands of communes timber and fuel
wood are divided every year among all inhabitants; even the old
custom of the Lesholztag is widely spread: at the ringing of the
village bell all go to the forest to take as much fuel wood as
they can carry.(30) In Westphalia one finds communes in which
all the land is cultivated as one common estate, in accordance
with all requirements of modern agronomy. As to the old communal
customs and habits, they are in vigour in most parts of Germany.
The calling in of aids, which are real fetes of labour, is known
to be quite habitual in Westphalia, Hesse, and Nassau. In
well-timbered regions the timber for a new house is usually taken
from the communal forest, and all the neighbours join in building
the house. Even in the suburbs of Frankfort it is a regular
custom among the gardeners that in case of one of them being ill
all come on Sunday to cultivate his garden.(31)

In Germany, as in France, as soon as the rulers of the people
repealed their laws against the peasant associations--that was
only in 1884-1888--these unions began to develop with a
wonderful rapidity, notwithstanding all legal obstacles which
were put in their way(32) "It is a fact," Buchenberger says,
"that in thousands of village communities, in which no sort of
chemical manure or rational fodder was ever known, both have
become of everyday use, to a quite unforeseen extent, owing to
these associations" (vol. ii. p. 507). All sorts of labour-saving
implements and agricultural machinery, and better breeds of
cattle, are bought through the associations, and various
arrangements for improving the quality of the produce begin to be
introduced. Unions for the sale of agricultural produce are also
formed, as well as for permanent improvements of the land.(33)

From the point of view of social economics all these efforts
of the peasants certainly are of little importance. They cannot
substantially, and still less permanently, alleviate the misery
to which the tillers of the soil are doomed all over Europe. But
from the ethical point of view, which we are now considering,
their importance cannot be overrated. They prove that even under
the system of reckless individualism which now prevails the
agricultural masses piously maintain their mutual-support
inheritance; and as soon as the States relax the iron laws by
means of which they have broken all bonds between men, these
bonds are at once reconstituted, notwithstanding the
difficulties, political, economical, and social, which are many,
and in such forms as best answer to the modern requirements of
production. They indicate in which direction and in which form
further progress must be expected.

I might easily multiply such illustrations, taking them from
Italy, Spain, Denmark, and so on, and pointing out some
interesting features which are proper to each of these
countries. The Slavonian populations of Austria and the
Balkan peninsula, among whom the "compound family," or "undivided
household," is found in existence, ought also to be
mentioned.(34) But I hasten to pass on to Russia, where the same
mutual-support tendency takes certain new and unforeseen forms.
Moreover, in dealing with the village community in Russia we have
the advantage: of possessing an immense mass of materials,
collected during the colossal house-to-house inquest which was
lately made by several zemstvos (county councils), and which
embraces a population of nearly 20,000,000 peasants in different
parts of the country.(35)

Two important conclusions may be drawn from the bulk of
evidence collected by the Russian inquests. In Middle Russia,
where fully one-third of the peasants have been brought to utter
ruin (by heavy taxation, small allotments of unproductive land,
rack rents, and very severe tax-collecting after total failures
of crops), there was, during the first five-and-twenty years
after the emancipation of the serfs, a decided tendency towards
the constitution of individual property in land within the
village communities. Many impoverished "horseless" peasants
abandoned their allotments, and this land often became the
property of those richer peasants, who borrow additional incomes
from trade, or of outside traders, who buy land chiefly for
exacting rack rents from the peasants. It must also be added that
a flaw in the land redemption law of 1861 offered great
facilities for buying peasants' lands at a very small
expense,(36) and that the State officials mostly used their
weighty influence in favour of individual as against communal
ownership. However, for the last twenty years a strong wind of
opposition to the individual appropriation of the land blows
again through the Middle Russian villages, and strenuous efforts
are being made by the bulk of those peasants who stand between
the rich and the very poor to uphold the village community. As to
the fertile steppes of the South, which are now the most populous
and the richest part of European Russia, they were mostly
colonized, during the present century, under the system of
individual ownership or occupation, sanctioned in that form by
the State. But since improved methods of agriculture with the aid
of machinery have been introduced in the region, the peasant
owners have gradually begun themselves to transform their
individual ownership into communal possession, and one finds now,
in that granary of Russia, a very great number of spontaneously
formed village communities of recent origin.(37)

The Crimea and the part of the mainland which lies to the
north of it (the province of Taurida), for which we have detailed
data, offer an excellent illustration of that movement. This
territory began to be colonized, after its annexation in 1783, by
Great, Little, and White Russians--Cossacks, freemen, and
runaway serfs--who came individually or in small groups from
all corners of Russia. They took first to cattle-breeding, and
when they began later on to till the soil, each one tilled as
much as he could afford to. But when--immigration continuing,
and perfected ploughs being introduced--land stood in great
demand, bitter disputes arose among the settlers. They lasted for
years, until these men, previously tied by no mutual bonds,
gradually came to the idea that an end must be put to disputes by
introducing village-community ownership. They passed decisions to
the effect that the land which they owned individually should
henceforward be their common property, and they began to allot
and to re-allot it in accordance with the usual village-community
rules. The movement gradually took a great extension, and on a
small territory, the Taurida statisticians found 161 villages in
which communal ownership had been introduced by the peasant
proprietors themselves, chiefly in the years 1855-1885, in lieu
of individual ownership. Quite a variety of village-community
types has been freely worked out in this way by the
settlers.(38) What adds to the interest of this transformation
is that it took place, not only among the Great Russians, who are
used to village-community life, but also among Little Russians,
who have long since forgotten it under Polish rule, among Greeks
and Bulgarians, and even among Germans, who have long since
worked out in their prosperous and half-industrial Volga colonies
their own type of village community.(39) It is evident that the
Mussulman Tartars of Taurida hold their land under the Mussulman
customary law, which is limited personal occupation; but even
with them the European village community has been introduced in a
few cases. As to other nationalities in Taurida, individual
ownership has been abolished in six Esthonian, two Greek, two
Bulgarian, one Czech, and one German village. This movement is
characteristic for the whole of the fertile steppe region of the
south. But separate instances of it are also found in Little
Russia. Thus in a number of villages of the province of Chernigov
the peasants were formerly individual owners of their plots; they
had separate legal documents for their plots and used to rent and
to sell their land at will. But in the fifties of the nineteenth
century a movement began among them in favour of communal
possession, the chief argument being the growing number of pauper
families. The initiative of the reform was taken in one village,
and the others followed suit, the last case on record dating from
1882. Of course there were struggles between the poor, who
usually claim for communal possession, and the rich, who usually
prefer individual ownership; and the struggles often lasted for
years. In certain places the unanimity required then by the law
being impossible to obtain, the village divided into two
villages, one under individual ownership and the other under
communal possession; and so they remained until the two coalesced
into one community, or else they remained divided still As to
Middle Russia, its a fact that in many villages which were
drifting towards individual ownership there began since 1880 a
mass movement in favour of re-establishing the village community.
Even peasant proprietors who had lived for years under the
individualist system returned en masse to the communal
institutions. Thus, there is a considerable number of ex-serfs
who have received one-fourth part only of the regulation
allotments, but they have received them free of redemption and in
individual ownership. There was in 1890 a wide-spread movement
among them (in Kursk, Ryazan, Tambov, Orel, etc.) towards putting
their allotments together and introducing the village community.
The "free agriculturists" (volnyie khlebopashtsy), who were
liberated from serfdom under the law of 1803, and had bought
their allotments--each family separately--are now nearly all
under the village-community system, which they have introduced
themselves. All these movements are of recent origin, and
non-Russians too join them. Thus the Bulgares in the district of
Tiraspol, after having remained for sixty years under the
personal-property system, introduced the village community in the
years 1876-1882. The German Mennonites of Berdyansk fought in
1890 for introducing the village community, and the small peasant
proprietors (Kleinwirthschaftliche) among the German Baptists
were agitating in their villages in the same direction. One
instance more: In the province of Samara the Russian government
created in the forties, by way of experiment, 1O3 villages on the
system of individual ownership. Each household received a
splendid property of 105 acres. In 1890, out of the 103 villages
the peasants in 72 had already notified the desire of introducing
the village community. I take all these facts from the excellent
work of V.V., who simply gives, in a classified form, the facts
recorded in the above-mentioned house-to-house inquest.

This movement in favour of communal possession runs badly
against the current economical theories, according to which
intensive culture is incompatible with the village community. But
the most charitable thing that can be said of these theories is
that they have never been submitted to the test of experiment:
they belong to the domain of political metaphysics. The facts
which we have before us show, on the contrary, that wherever the
Russian peasants, owing to a concurrence of favourable
circumstances, are less miserable than they are on the average,
and wherever they find men of knowledge and initiative among
their neighbours, the village community becomes the very means
for introducing various improvements in agriculture and village
life altogether. Here, as elsewhere, mutual aid is a better
leader to progress than the war of each against all, as may be
seen from the following facts.

Under Nicholas the First's rule many Crown officials and
serf-owners used to compel the peasants to introduce the communal
culture of small plots of the village lands, in order to refill
the communal storehouses after loans of grain had been granted to
the poorest commoners. Such cultures, connected in the peasants'
minds with the worst reminiscences of serfdom, were abandoned as
soon as serfdom was abolished  but now the peasants begin to
reintroduce them on their own account. In one district
(Ostrogozhsk, in Kursk) the initiative of one person was
sufficient to call them to life in four-fifths of all the
villages. The same is met with in several other localities. On a
given day the commoners come out, the richer ones with a plough
or a cart and the poorer ones single-handed, and no attempt is
made to discriminate one's share in the work. The crop is
afterwards used for loans to the poorer commoners, mostly free
grants, or for the orphans and widows, or for the village church,
or for the school, or for repaying a communal debt.(40)

That all sorts of work which enters, so to say, in the
routine of village life (repair of roads and bridges, dams,
drainage, supply of water for irrigation, cutting of wood,
planting of trees, etc.) are made by whole communes, and that
land is rented and meadows are mown by whole communes--the work
being accomplished by old and young, men and women, in the way
described by Tolstoi--is only what one may expect from people
living under the village-community system.(41) They are of
everyday occurrence all over the country. But the village
community is also by no means averse to modern agricultural
improvements, when it can stand the expense, and when knowledge,
hitherto kept for the rich only, finds its way into the peasant's
house.

It has just been said that perfected ploughs rapidly spread
in South Russia, and in many cases the village communities were
instrumental in spreading their use. A plough was bought by the
community, experimented upon on a portion of the communal land,
and the necessary improvements were indicated to the makers, whom
the communes often aided in starting the manufacture of cheap
ploughs as a village industry. In the district of Moscow, where
1,560 ploughs were lately bought by the peasants during five
years, the impulse came from those communes which rented lands as
a body for the special purpose of improved culture.

In the north-east (Vyatka) small associations of peasants,
who travel with their winnowing machines (manufactured as a
village industry in one of the iron districts), have spread the
use of such machines in the neighbouring governments. The very
wide spread of threshing machines in Samara, Saratov, and Kherson
is due to the peasant associations, which can afford to buy a
costly engine, while the individual peasant cannot. And while we
read in nearly all economical treatises that the village
community was doomed to disappear when the three-fields system
had to be substituted by the rotation of crops system, we see in
Russia many village communities taking the initiative of
introducing the rotation of crops. Before accepting it the
peasants usually set apart a portion of the communal fields for
an experiment in artificial meadows, and the commune buys the
seeds.(42) If the experiment proves successful they find no
difficulty whatever in re-dividing their fields, so as to suit
the five or six fields system.

This system is now in use in hundreds of villages of Moscow,
Tver, Smolensk, Vyatka, and Pskov.(43) And where land can be
spared the communities give also a portion of their domain to
allotments for fruit-growing. Finally, the sudden extension
lately taken in Russia by the little model farms, orchards,
kitchen gardens, and silkworm-culture grounds--which are
started at the village school-houses, under the conduct of the
school-master, or of a village volunteer--is also due to the
support they found with the village communities.

Moreover, such permanent improvements as drainage and
irrigation are of frequent occurrence. For instance, in three
districts of the province of Moscow--industrial to a great
extent--drainage works have been accomplished within the last
ten years on a large scale in no less than 180 to 200 different
villages--the commoners working themselves with the spade. At
another extremity of Russia, in the dry Steppes of Novouzen, over
a thousand dams for ponds were built and several hundreds of deep
wells were sunk by the communes; while in a wealthy German colony
of the south-east the commoners worked, men and women alike, for
five weeks in succession, to erect a dam, two miles long, for
irrigation purposes. What could isolated men do in that struggle
against the dry climate? What could they obtain through
individual effort when South Russia was struck with the marmot
plague, and all people living on the land, rich and poor,
commoners and individualists, had to work with their hands in
order to conjure the plague? To call in the policeman would have
been of no use; to associate was the only possible remedy.

And now, after having said so much about mutual aid and
support which are practised by the tillers of the soil in
"civilized" countries, I see that I might fill an octavo volume
with illustrations taken from the life of the hundreds of
millions of men who also live under the tutorship of more or less
centralized States, but are out of touch with modern civilization
and modern ideas. I might describe the inner life of a Turkish
village and its network of admirable mutual-aid customs and
habits. On turning over my leaflets covered with illustrations
from peasant life in Caucasia, I come across touching facts of
mutual support. I trace the same customs in the Arab djemmaa and
the Afghan purra, in the villages of Persia, India, and Java, in
the undivided family of the Chinese, in the encampments of the
semi-nomads of Central Asia and the nomads of the far North. On
consulting notes taken at random in the literature of Africa, I
find them replete with similar facts--of aids convoked to take
in the crops, of houses built by all inhabitants of the village--
sometimes to repair the havoc done by civilized filibusters--
of people aiding each other in case of accident, protecting the
traveller, and so on. And when I peruse such works as Post's
compendium of African customary law I understand why,
notwithstanding all tyranny, oppression, robberies and raids,
tribal wars, glutton kings, deceiving witches and priests,
slave-hunters, and the like, these populations have not gone
astray in the woods; why they have maintained a certain
civilization, and have remained men, instead of dropping to the
level of straggling families of decaying orang-outans. The fact
is, that the slave-hunters, the ivory robbers, the fighting
kings, the Matabele and the Madagascar "heroes" pass away,
leaving their traces marked with blood and fire; but the nucleus
of mutual-aid institutions, habits, and customs, grown up in the
tribe and the village community, remains; and it keeps men united
in societies, open to the progress of civilization, and ready to
receive it when the day comes that they shall receive
civilization instead of bullets.

The same applies to our civilized world. The natural and
social calamities pass away. Whole populations are periodically
reduced to misery or starvation; the very springs of life are
crushed out of millions of men, reduced to city pauperism; the
understanding and the feelings of the millions are vitiated by
teachings worked out in the interest of the few. All this is
certainly a part of our existence. But the nucleus of
mutual-support institutions, habits, and customs remains alive
with the millions; it keeps them together; and they prefer to
cling to their customs, beliefs, and traditions rather than to
accept the teachings of a war of each against all, which are
offered to them under the title of science, but are no science at
all.

NOTES:

1. A bulky literature, dealing with this formerly much neglected
subject, is now growing in Germany. Keller's works, Ein Apostel
der Wiedertaufer and Geschichte der Wiedertaufer, Cornelius's
Geschichte des munsterischen Aufruhrs, and Janssen's Geschichte
des deutschen Volkes may be named as the leading sources. The
first attempt at familiarizing English readers with the results
of the wide researches made in Germany in this direction has been
made in an excellent little work by Richard Heath--"Anabaptism
from its Rise at Zwickau to its Fall at Munster, 1521-1536,"
London, 1895 (Baptist Manuals, vol. i.)--where the leading
features of the movement are well indicated, and full
bibliographical information is given. Also K. Kautsky's Communism
in Central Europe in the Time of the Reformation, London, 1897.

2. Few of our contemporaries realize both the extent of this
movement and the means by which it was suppressed. But those who
wrote immediately after the great peasant war estimated at from
100,000 to 150,000 men the number of peasants slaughtered after
their defeat in Germany. See Zimmermann's Allgemeine Geschichte
des grossen Bauernkrieges. For the measures taken to suppress the
movement in the Netherlands see Richard Heath's Anabaptism.

3. "Chacun s'en est accommode selon sa bienseance... on les a
partages.. pour depouiller les communes, on s'est servi de dettes
simulees" (Edict of Louis the Fourteenth, of 1667, quoted by
several authors. Eight years before that date the communes had
been taken under State management).

4. "On a great landlord's estate, even if he has millions of
revenue, you are sure to find the land uncultivated" (Arthur
Young). "One-fourth part of the soil went out of culture;" "for
the last hundred years the land has returned to a savage state;"
"the formerly flourishing Sologne is now a big marsh;" and so on
(Theron de Montauge, quoted by Taine in Origines de la France
Contemporaine, tome i. p. 441).

5. A. Babeau, Le Village sous l'Ancien Regime, 3e edition. Paris,
1892.

6. In Eastern France the law only confirmed what the peasants had
already done themselves. See my work, The Great French Revolution,
chaps. xlvii and xlviii, London (Heinemann), 1909.

7. After the triumph of the middle-class reaction the communal
lands were declared (August 24, 1794) the States domains, and,
together with the lands confiscated from the nobility, were put
up for sale, and pilfered by the bandes noires of the small
bourgeoisie. True that a stop to this pilfering was put next year
(law of 2 Prairial, An V), and the preceding law was abrogated;
but then the village Communities were simply abolished, and
cantonal councils were introduced instead. Only seven years later
(9 Prairial, An XII), i.e. in 1801, the village communities were
reintroduced, but not until after having been deprived of all
their rights, the mayor and syndics being nominated by the
Government in the 36,000 communes of France! This system was
maintained till after the revolution of 1830, when elected
communal councils were reintroduced under the law of 1787. As to
the communal lands, they were again seized upon by the State in
1813, plundered as such, and only partly restored to the communes
in 1816. See the classical collection of French laws, by Dalloz,
Repertoire de Jurisprudence; also the works of Doniol, Dareste,
Bonnemere, Babeau, and many others.

8. This procedure is so absurd that one would not believe it
possible if the fifty-two different acts were not enumerated in
full by a quite authoritative writer in the Journal des
Economistes (1893, April, p. 94), and several similar examples
were not given by the same author.

9. Dr. Ochenkowski, Englands wirthschaftliche Entwickelung im
Ausgange des Mittelalters (Jena, 1879), pp. 35 seq., where the
whole question is discussed with full knowledge of the texts.

10. Nasse, Ueber die mittelalterliche Feldgemeinschaft und die
Einhegungen des XVI. Jahrhunderts in England (Bonn, 1869), pp. 4,
5; Vinogradov, Villainage in England (Oxford, 1892).

11. Fr. Seebohm, The English Village Community, 3rd ed., 1884,
pp. 13-15.

12. "An examination into the details of an Enclosure Act will
make clear the point that the system as above described [communal
ownership] is the system which it was the object of the Enclosure
Act to remove" (Seebohm, l.c. p. 13). And further on, "They were
generally drawn in the same form, commencing with the recital
that the open and common fields lie dispersed in small pieces,
intermixed with each other and inconveniently situated; that
divers persons own parts of them, and are entitled to rights of
common on them... and that it is desired that they may be divided
and enclosed, a specific share being let out and allowed to each
owner" (p. 14). Porter's list contained 3867 such Acts, of which
the greatest numbers fall upon the decades of 1770-1780 and
1800-1820, as in France.

13. In Switzerland we see a number of communes, ruined by wars,
which have sold part of their lands, and now endeavour to buy
them back.

14. A. Buchenberger, "Agrarwesen und Agrarpolitik," in A.
Wagner's Handbuch der politischen Oekonomie, 1892, Band i. pp.
280 seq.

15. G.L. Gomme, "The Village Community, with special reference to
its Origin and Forms of Survival in Great Britain" (Contemporary
Science Series), London, 1890, pp. 141-143; also his Primitive
Folkmoots (London, 1880), pp. 98 seq.

16. "In almost all parts of the country, in the Midland and
Eastern counties particularly, but also in the west--in
Wiltshire, for example--in the south, as in Surrey, in the
north, as in Yorkshire,--there are extensive open and common
fields. Out of 316 parishes of Northamptonshire 89 are in this
condition; more than 100 in Oxfordshire; about 50,000 acres in
Warwickshire; in Berkshire half the county; more than half of
Wiltshire; in Huntingdonshire out of a total area of 240,000
acres 130,000 were commonable meadows, commons, and fields"
(Marshall, quoted in Sir Henry Maine's Village Communities in the
East and West, New York edition, 1876, pp. 88, 89). See also Dr. G.
Slater's The English Peasantry and the Enclosure of Common Fields,
London, 1907.

17. Ibid. p. 88; also Fifth Lecture.

18. In quite a number of books dealing with English country life
which I have consulted I have found charming descriptions of
country scenery and the like, but almost nothing about the daily
life and customs of the labourers.

19. In Switzerland the peasants in the open land also fell under the
dominion of lords, and large parts of their estates were
appropriated by the lords in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries. (cf. A. Miaskowski, in Schmoller's Forschungen, Bd. ii.
1879, pp. 12 seq.) But the peasant war in Switzerland did not end in
such a crushing defeat of the peasants as it did in other countries,
and a great deal of the communal rights and lands was retained. The
self-government of the communes is, in fact, the very foundation of
the Swiss liberties. (cf. K. Burtli, Der Ursprung der
Eidgenossenschaft aus der Markgenossenschaft, Zurich, 1891.)

20. Dr. Reichesberg, Handworterbuch des Schweiz. Volkswirthschaft,
Bern, 1903.

21. See on this subject a series of works, summed up in one of
the excellent and suggestive chapters (not yet translated into
English) which K. Bucher has added to the German translation of
Laveleye's Primitive Ownership. Also Meitzen, "Das Agrar-und
Forst-Wesen, die Allmenden und die Landgemeinden der Deutschen
Schweiz," in Jahrbuch fur Staatswissenschaft, 1880, iv. (analysis
of Miaskowsky's works); O'Brien, "Notes in a Swiss village," in
Macmillan's Magazine, October 1885.

22. The wedding gifts, which often substantially contribute in
this country to the comfort of the young households, are
evidently a remainder of the communal habits.

23. The communes own, 4,554,100 acres of woods out of 24,813,000
in the whole territory, and 6,936,300 acres of natural meadows
out of 11,394,000 acres in France. The remaining 2,000,000 acres
are fields, orchards, and so on.

24. In Caucasia they even do better among the Georgians. As the
meal costs, and a poor man cannot afford to give it, a sheep is
bought by those same neighbours who come to aid in the work.

25. Alfred Baudrillart, in H. Baudrillart's Les Populations
Rurales de la France, 3rd series (Paris, 1893), p. 479.

26. The Journal des Economistes (August 1892, May and August
1893) has lately given some of the results of analyses made at
the agricultural laboratories at Ghent and at Paris. The extent
of falsification is simply incredible; so also the devices of the
"honest traders." In certain seeds of grass there was 32 per
cent. of gains of sand, coloured so as to Receive even an
experienced eye; other samples contained from 52 to 22 per cent.
only of pure seed, the remainder being weeds. Seeds of vetch
contained 11 per cent. of a poisonous grass (nielle); a flour for
cattle-fattening contained 36 per cent. of sulphates; and so on
ad infinitum.

27. A. Baudrillart, l.c. p. 309. Originally one grower would
undertake to supply water, and several others would agee to make
use of it. "What especially characterises such associations," A.
Baudrillart remarks, "is that no sort of written agreement is
concluded. All is arranged in words. There was, however, not one
single case of difficulties having arisen between the parties."

28. A. Baudrillart, l.c. pp. 300, 341, etc. M. Terssac, president
of the St. Gironnais syndicate (Ariege), wrote to my friend in
substance as follows:--"For the exhibition of Toulouse our
association has grouped the owners of cattle which seemed to us
worth exhibiting. The society undertook to pay one-half of the
travelling and exhibition expenses; one-fourth was paid by each
owner, and the remaining fourth by those exhibitors who had got
prizes. The result was that many took part in the exhibition who
never would have done it otherwise. Those who got the highest
awards (350 francs) have contributed 10 per cent. of their
prizes, while those who have got no prize have only spent 6 to 7
francs each."

29. In Wurttemberg 1,629 communes out of 1,910 have communal
property. They owned in 1863 over 1,000,000 acres of land. In
Baden 1,256 communes out of 1,582 have communal land; in
1884-1888 they held 121,500 acres of fields in communal culture,
and 675,000 acres of forests, i.e. 46 per cent. of the total area
under woods. In Saxony 39 per cent. of the total area is in
communal ownership (Schmoller's Jahrbuch, 1886, p. 359). In
Hohenzollern nearly two-thirds of all meadow land, and in
Hohenzollern-Hechingen 41 per cent. of all landed property, are
owned by the village communities (Buchenberger, Agrarwesen, vol.
i. p. 300).

30. See K. Bucher, who, in a special chapter added to Laveleye's
Ureigenthum, has collected all information relative to the
village community in Germany.

31. K. Bucher, ibid. pp. 89, 90.

32. For this legislation and the numerous obstacles which were
put in the way, in the shape of red-tapeism and supervision, see
Buchenberger's Agrarwesen und Agrarpolitik, Bd. ii. pp. 342-363,
and p. 506, note.

33. Buchenberger, l.c. Bd. ii. p. 510. The General Union of
Agricultural Co-operation comprises an aggregate of 1,679
societies. In Silesia an aggregate of 32,000 acres of land has
been lately drained by 73 associations; 454,800 acres in Prussia
by 516 associations; in Bavaria there are 1,715 drainage and
irrigation unions.

34. For the Balkan peninsula see Laveleye's Propriete Primitive.

35. The facts concerning the village community, contained in
nearly a hundred volumes (out of 450) of these inquests, have
been classified and summed up in an excellent Russian work by
"V.V." The Peasant Community (Krestianskaya Obschina), St.
Petersburg, 1892, which, apart from its theoretical value, is a
rich compendium of data relative to this subject. The above
inquests have also given origin to an immense literature, in
which the modern village-community question for the first time
emerges from the domain of generalities and is put on the solid
basis of reliable and sufficiently detailed facts.

36. The redemption had to be paid by annuities for forty-nine
years. As years went, and the greatest part of it was paid, it
became easier and easier to redeem the smaller remaining part of
it, and, as each allotment could be redeemed individually,
advantage was taken of this disposition by traders, who bought
land for half its value from the ruined peasants. A law was
consequently passed to put a stop to such sales.

37. Mr. V.V., in his Peasant Community, has grouped together all
facts relative to this movement. About the rapid agricultural
development of South Russia and the spread of machinery English
readers will find information in the Consular Reports (Odessa,
Taganrog).

38. In some instances they proceeded with great caution. In one
village they began by putting together all meadow land, but only
a small portion of the fields (about five acres per soul) was
rendered communal; the remainder continued to be owned
individually. Later on, in 1862-1864, the system was extended,
but only in 1884 was communal possession introduced in full.--
V.V.'s Peasant Community, pp. 1-14.

39. On the Mennonite village community see A. Klaus, Our Colonies
(Nashi Kolonii), St. Petersburg, 1869.

40. Such communal cultures are known to exist in 159 villages out
of 195 in the Ostrogozhsk district; in 150 out of 187 in
Slavyanoserbsk; in 107 village communities in Alexandrovsk, 93 in
Nikolayevsk, 35 in Elisabethgrad. In a German colony the communal
culture is made for repaying a communal debt. All join in the
work, although the debt was contracted by 94 householders out of
155.

41. Lists of such works which came under the notice of the
zemstvo statisticians will be found in V.V.'s Peasant Community,
pp. 459-600.

42. In the government of Moscow the experiment was usually made
on the field which was reserved for the above-mentioned communal
culture.

43. Several instances of such and similar improvements were given
in the Official Messenger, 1894, Nos. 256-258. Associations
between "horseless" peasants begin to appear also in South
Russia. Another extremely interesting fact is the sudden
development in Southern West Siberia of very numerous
co-operative creameries for making butter. Hundreds of them
spread in Tobolsk and Tomsk, without any one knowing wherefrom
the initiative of the movement came. It came from the Danish
co-operators, who used to export their own butter of higher
quality, and to buy butter of a lower quality for their own use
in Siberia. After a several years' intercourse, they introduced
creameries there. Now, a great export trade, carried on by a
Union of the Creameries, has grown out of their endeavours and
more than a thousand co-operative shops have been opened in the
villages.






CHAPTER VIII

MUTUAL AID AMONGST OURSELVES (continued)

Labour-unions grown after the destruction of the guilds by the
State. Their struggles. Mutual Aid in strikes. 
Co-operation. Free associations for various purposes. Self-sacrifice.
Countless societies for combined action under all possible aspects.
Mutual Aid in slum-life. Personal aid.





When we examine the every-day life of the rural populations
of Europe, we find that, notwithstanding all that has been done
in modern States for the destruction of the village community,
the life of the peasants remains honeycombed with habits and
customs of mutual aid and support; that important vestiges of the
communal possession of the soil are still retained; and that, as
soon as the legal obstacles to rural association were lately
removed, a network of free unions for all sorts of economical
purposes rapidly spread among the peasants--the tendency of
this young movement being to reconstitute some sort of union
similar to the village community of old. Such being the
conclusions arrived at in the preceding chapter, we have now to
consider, what institutions for mutual support can be found at
the present time amongst the industrial populations.

For the last three hundred years, the conditions for the
growth of such institutions have been as unfavourable in the
towns as they have been in the villages. It is well known,
indeed, that when the medieval cities were subdued in the
sixteenth century by growing military States, all institutions
which kept the artisans, the masters, and the merchants together
in the guilds and the cities were violently destroyed. The
self-government and the self-jurisdiction of both, the guild and
the city were abolished; the oath of allegiance between
guild-brothers became an act of felony towards the State; the
properties of the guilds were confiscated in the same way as the
lands of the village communities; and the inner and technical
organization of each trade was taken in hand by the State. Laws,
gradually growing in severity, were passed to prevent artisans
from combining in any way. For a time, some shadows of the old
guilds were tolerated: merchants' guilds were allowed to exist
under the condition of freely granting subsidies to the kings,
and some artisan guilds were kept in existence as organs of
administration. Some of them still drag on their meaningless
existence. But what formerly was the vital force of medieval life
and industry has long since disappeared under the crushing weight
of the centralized State.

In Great Britain, which may be taken as the best illustration
of the industrial policy of the modern States, we see the
Parliament beginning the destruction of the guilds as early as
the fifteenth century; but it was especially in the next century
that decisive measures were taken. Henry the Eighth not only
ruined the organization of the guilds, but also confiscated their
properties, with even less excuse and manners, as Toulmin Smith
wrote, than he had produced for confiscating the estates of the
monasteries.(1) Edward the Sixth completed his work,(2) and
already in the second part of the sixteenth century we find the
Parliament settling all the disputes between craftsmen and
merchants, which formerly were settled in each city separately.
The Parliament and the king not only legislated in all such
contests, but, keeping in view the interests of the Crown in the
exports, they soon began to determine the number of apprentices
in each trade and minutely to regulate the very technics of each
fabrication--the weights of the stuffs, the number of threads
in the yard of cloth, and the like. With little success, it must
be said; because contests and technical difficulties which were
arranged for centuries in succession by agreement between
closely-interdependent guilds and federated cities lay entirely
beyond the powers of the centralized State. The continual
interference of its officials paralyzed the trades; bringing most
of them to a complete decay; and the last century economists,
when they rose against the State regulation of industries, only
ventilated a widely-felt discontent. The abolition of that
interference by the French Revolution was greeted as an act of
liberation, and the example of France was soon followed
elsewhere.

With the regulation of wages the State had no better success.
In the medieval cities, when the distinction between masters and
apprentices or journeymen became more and more apparent in the
fifteenth century, unions of apprentices (Gesellenverbande),
occasionally assuming an international character, were opposed to
the unions of masters and merchants. Now it was the State which
undertook to settle their griefs, and under the Elizabethan
Statute of 1563 the Justices of Peace had to settle the wages, so
as to guarantee a "convenient" livelihood to journeymen and
apprentices. The Justices, however, proved helpless to conciliate
the conflicting interests, and still less to compel the masters
to obey their decisions. The law gradually became a dead letter,
and was repealed by the end of the eighteenth century. But while
the State thus abandoned the function of regulating wages, it
continued severely to prohibit all combinations which were
entered upon by journeymen and workers in order to raise their
wages, or to keep them at a certain level. All through the
eighteenth century it legislated against the workers' unions, and
in 1799 it finally prohibited all sorts of combinations, under
the menace of severe punishments. In fact, the British Parliament
only followed in this case the example of the French
Revolutionary Convention, which had issued a draconic law against
coalitions of workers-coalitions between a number of citizens
being considered as attempts against the sovereignty of the
State, which was supposed equally to protect all its subjects.
The work of destruction of the medieval unions was thus
completed. Both in the town and in the village the State reigned
over loose aggregations of individuals, and was ready to prevent
by the most stringent measures the reconstitution of any sort of
separate unions among them. These were, then, the conditions
under which the mutual-aid tendency had to make its way in the
nineteenth century.

Need it be said that no such measures could destroy that
tendency? Throughout the eighteenth century, the workers' unions
were continually reconstituted.(3) Nor were they stopped by the
cruel prosecutions which took place under the laws of 1797 and
1799. Every flaw in supervision, every delay of the masters in
denouncing the unions was taken advantage of. Under the cover of
friendly societies, burial clubs, or secret brotherhoods, the
unions spread in the textile industries, among the Sheffield
cutlers, the miners, and vigorous federal organizations were
formed to support the branches during strikes and
prosecutions.(4) The repeal of the Combination Laws in 1825 gave
a new impulse to the movement. Unions and national federations
were formed in all trades.(5) and when Robert Owen started his
Grand National Consolidated Trades' Union, it mustered half a
million members in a few months. True that this period of
relative liberty did not last long. Prosecution began anew in the
thirties, and the well-known ferocious condemnations of 1832-1844
followed. The Grand National Union was disbanded, and all over
the country, both the private employers and the Government in its
own workshops began to compel the workers to resign all
connection with unions, and to sign "the Document" to that
effect. Unionists were prosecuted wholesale under the Master and
Servant Act--workers being summarily arrested and condemned
upon a mere complaint of misbehaviour lodged by the master.(6)
Strikes were suppressed in an autocratic way, and the most
astounding condemnations took place for merely having announced a
strike or acted as a delegate in it--to say nothing of the
military suppression of strike riots, nor of the condemnations
which followed the frequent outbursts of acts of violence. To
practise mutual support under such circumstances was anything but
an easy task. And yet, notwithstanding all obstacles, of which
our own generation hardly can have an idea, the revival of the
unions began again in 1841, and the amalgamation of the workers
has been steadily continued since. After a long fight, which
lasted for over a hundred years, the right of combining together
was conquered, and at the present time nearly one-fourth part of
the regularly-employed workers, i.e. about 1,500,000, belong to
trade unions.(7)

As to the other European States, sufficient to say that up to
a very recent date, all sorts of unions were prosecuted as
conspiracies; and that nevertheless they exist everywhere, even
though they must often take the form of secret societies; while
the extension and the force of labour organizations, and
especially of the Knights of Labour, in the United States and in
Belgium, have been sufficiently illustrated by strikes in the
nineties. It must, however, be borne in mind that, prosecution
apart, the mere fact of belonging to a labour union implies
considerable sacrifices in money, in time, and in unpaid work,
and continually implies the risk of losing employment for the
mere fact of being a unionist.(8) There is, moreover, the
strike, which a unionist has continually to face; and the grim
reality of a strike is, that the limited credit of a worker's
family at the baker's and the pawnbroker's is soon exhausted, the
strike-pay goes not far even for food, and hunger is soon written
on the children's faces. For one who lives in close contact with
workers, a protracted strike is the most heartrending sight;
while what a strike meant forty years ago in this country, and
still means in all but the wealthiest parts of the continent, can
easily be conceived. Continually, even now, strikes will end with
the total ruin and the forced emigration of whole populations,
while the shooting down of strikers on the slightest provocation,
or even without any provocation,(9) is quite habitual still on
the continent.

And yet, every year there are thousands of strikes and
lock-outs in Europe and America--the most severe and protracted
contests being, as a rule, the so-called "sympathy strikes,"
which are entered upon to support locked-out comrades or to
maintain the rights of the unions. And while a portion of the
Press is prone to explain strikes by "intimidation," those who
have lived among strikers speak with admiration of the mutual aid
and support which are constantly practised by them. Every one has
heard of the colossal amount of work which was done by volunteer
workers for organizing relief during the London dock-labourers'
strike; of the miners who, after having themselves been idle for
many weeks, paid a levy of four shillings a week to the strike
fund when they resumed work; of the miner widow who, during the
Yorkshire labour war of 1894, brought her husband's life-savings
to the strike-fund; of the last loaf of bread being always shared
with neighbours; of the Radstock miners, favoured with larger
kitchen-gardens, who invited four hundred Bristol miners to take
their share of cabbage and potatoes, and so on. All newspaper
correspondents, during the great strike of miners in Yorkshire in
1894, knew heaps of such facts, although not all of them could
report such "irrelevant" matters to their respective papers.(10)

Unionism is not, however, the only form in which the worker's
need of mutual support finds its expression. There are, besides,
the political associations, whose activity many workers consider
as more conducive to general welfare than the trade-unions,
limited as they are now in their purposes. Of course the mere
fact of belonging to a political body cannot be taken as a
manifestation of the mutual-aid tendency. We all know that
politics are the field in which the purely egotistic elements of
society enter into the most entangled combinations with
altruistic aspirations. But every experienced politician knows
that all great political movements were fought upon large and
often distant issues, and that those of them were the strongest
which provoked most disinterested enthusiasm. All great
historical movements have had this character, and for our own
generation Socialism stands in that case. "Paid agitators" is, no
doubt, the favourite refrain of those who know nothing about it.
The truth, however, is that--to speak only of what I know
personally--if I had kept a diary for the last twenty-four
years and inscribed in it all the devotion and self-sacrifice
which I came across in the Socialist movement, the reader of such
a diary would have had the word "heroism" constantly on his lips.
But the men I would have spoken of were not heroes; they were
average men, inspired by a grand idea. Every Socialist newspaper--
and there are hundreds of them in Europe alone--has the same
history of years of sacrifice without any hope of reward, and, in
the overwhelming majority of cases, even without any personal
ambition. I have seen families living without knowing what would
be their food to-morrow, the husband boycotted all round in his
little town for his part in the paper, and the wife supporting
the family by sewing, and such a situation lasting for years,
until the family would retire, without a word of reproach, simply
saying: "Continue; we can hold on no more!" I have seen men,
dying from consumption, and knowing it, and yet knocking about in
snow and fog to prepare meetings, speaking at meetings within a
few weeks from death, and only then retiring to the hospital with
the words: "Now, friends, I am done; the doctors say I have but a
few weeks to live. Tell the comrades that I shall be happy if
they come to see me." I have seen facts which would be described
as "idealization" if I told them in this place; and the very
names of these men, hardly known outside a narrow circle of
friends, will soon be forgotten when the friends, too, have
passed away. In fact, I don't know myself which most to admire,
the unbounded devotion of these few, or the sum total of petty
acts of devotion of the great number. Every quire of a penny
paper sold, every meeting, every hundred votes which are won at a
Socialist election, represent an amount of energy and sacrifices
of which no outsider has the faintest idea. And what is now done
by Socialists has been done in every popular and advanced party,
political and religious, in the past. All past progress has been
promoted by like men and by a like devotion.

Co-operation, especially in Britain, is often described as
"joint-stock individualism"; and such as it is now, it
undoubtedly tends to breed a co-operative egotism, not only
towards the community at large, but also among the co-operators
themselves. It is, nevertheless, certain that at its origin the
movement had an essentially mutual-aid character. Even now, its
most ardent promoters are persuaded that co-operation leads
mankind to a higher harmonic stage of economical relations, and
it is not possible to stay in some of the strongholds of
co-operation in the North without realizing that the great number
of the rank and file hold the same opinion. Most of them would
lose interest in the movement if that faith were gone; and it
must be owned that within the last few years broader ideals of
general welfare and of the producers' solidarity have begun to be
current among the co-operators. There is undoubtedly now a
tendency towards establishing better relations between the owners
of the co-operative workshops and the workers.

The importance of co-operation in this country, in Holland
and in Denmark is well known; while in Germany, and especially on
the Rhine, the co-operative societies are already an important
factor of industrial life.(11) It is, however, Russia which
offers perhaps the best field for the study of cooperation under
an infinite variety of aspects. In Russia, it is a natural
growth, an inheritance from the middle ages; and while a formally
established co-operative society would have to cope with many
legal difficulties and official suspicion, the informal
co-operation--the artel--makes the very substance of Russian
peasant life. The history of "the making of Russia," and of the
colonization of Siberia, is a history of the hunting and trading
artels or guilds, followed by village communities, and at the
present time we find the artel everywhere; among each group of
ten to fifty peasants who come from the same village to work at a
factory, in all the building trades, among fishermen and hunters,
among convicts on their way to and in Siberia, among railway
porters, Exchange messengers, Customs House labourers, everywhere
in the village industries, which give occupation to 7,000,000 men--
from top to bottom of the working world, permanent and
temporary, for production and consumption under all possible
aspects. Until now, many of the fishing-grounds on the
tributaries of the Caspian Sea are held by immense artels, the
Ural river belonging to the whole of the Ural Cossacks, who allot
and re-allot the fishing-grounds--perhaps the richest in the
world--among the villages, without any interference of the
authorities. Fishing is always made by artels in the Ural, the
Volga, and all the lakes of Northern Russia. Besides these
permanent organizations, there are the simply countless temporary
artels, constituted for each special purpose. When ten or twenty
peasants come from some locality to a big town, to work as
weavers, carpenters, masons, boat-builders, and so on, they
always constitute an artel. They hire rooms, hire a cook (very
often the wife of one of them acts in this capacity), elect an
elder, and take their meals in common, each one paying his share
for food and lodging to the artel. A party of convicts on its way
to Siberia always does the same, and its elected elder is the
officially-recognized intermediary between the convicts and the
military chief of the party. In the hard-labour prisons they have
the same organization. The railway porters, the messengers at the
Exchange, the workers at the Custom House, the town messengers in
the capitals, who are collectively responsible for each member,
enjoy such a reputation that any amount of money or bank-notes is
trusted to the artel-member by the merchants. In the building
trades, artels of from 10 to 200 members are formed; and the
serious builders and railway contractors always prefer to deal
with an artel than with separately-hired workers. The last
attempts of the Ministry of War to deal directly with productive
artels, formed ad hoc in the domestic trades, and to give them
orders for boots and all sorts of brass and iron goods, are
described as most satisfactory; while the renting of a Crown iron
work, (Votkinsk) to an artel of workers, which took place seven
or eight years ago, has been a decided success.

We can thus see in Russia how the old medieval institution,
having not been interfered with by the State (in its informal
manifestations), has fully survived until now, and takes the
greatest variety of forms in accordance with the requirements of
modern industry and commerce. As to the Balkan peninsula, the
Turkish Empire and Caucasia, the old guilds are maintained there
in full. The esnafs of Servia have fully preserved their medieval
character; they include both masters and journeymen, regulate the
trades, and are institutions for mutual support in labour and
sickness;(12) while the amkari of Caucasia, and especially at
Tiflis, add to these functions a considerable influence in
municipal life.(13)

In connection with co-operation, I ought perhaps to mention
also the friendly societies, the unities of oddfellows, the
village and town clubs organized for meeting the doctors' bills,
the dress and burial clubs, the small clubs very common among
factory girls, to which they contribute a few pence every week,
and afterwards draw by lot the sum of one pound, which can at
least be used for some substantial purchase, and many others. A
not inconsiderable amount of sociable or jovial spirit is alive
in all such societies and clubs, even though the "credit and
debit" of each member are closely watched over. But there are so
many associations based on the readiness to sacrifice time,
health, and life if required, that we can produce numbers of
illustrations of the best forms of mutual support.

The Lifeboat Association in this country, and similar
institutions on the Continent, must be mentioned in the first
place. The former has now over three hundred boats along the
coasts of these isles, and it would have twice as many were it
not for the poverty of the fisher men, who cannot afford to buy
lifeboats. The crews consist, however, of volunteers, whose
readiness to sacrifice their lives for the rescue of absolute
strangers to them is put every year to a severe test; every
winter the loss of several of the bravest among them stands on
record. And if we ask these men what moves them to risk their
lives, even when there is no reasonable chance of success, their
answer is something on the following lines. A fearful snowstorm,
blowing across the Channel, raged on the flat, sandy coast of a
tiny village in Kent, and a small smack, laden with oranges,
stranded on the sands near by. In these shallow waters only a
flat-bottomed lifeboat of a simplified type can be kept, and to
launch it during such a storm was to face an almost certain
disaster. And yet the men went out, fought for hours against the
wind, and the boat capsized twice. One man was drowned, the
others were cast ashore. One of these last, a refined coastguard,
was found next morning, badly bruised and half frozen in the
snow. I asked him, how they came to make that desperate attempt?"
I don't know myself," was his reply." There was the wreck; all
the people from the village stood on the beach, and all said it
would be foolish to go out; we never should work through the
surf. We saw five or six men clinging to the mast, making
desperate signals. We all felt that something must be done, but
what could we do? One hour passed, two hours, and we all stood
there. We all felt most uncomfortable. Then, all of a sudden,
through the storm, it seemed to us as if we heard their cries--
they had a boy with them. We could not stand that any longer. All
at once we said, "We must go!" The women said so too; they would
have treated us as cowards if we had not gone, although next day
they said we had been fools to go. As one man, we rushed to the
boat, and went. The boat capsized, but we took hold of it. The
worst was to see poor drowning by the side of the boat, and we
could do nothing to save him. Then came a fearful wave, the boat
capsized again, and we were cast ashore. The men were still
rescued by the D. boat, ours was caught miles away. I was found
next morning in the snow."

The same feeling moved also the miners of the Rhonda Valley,
when they worked for the rescue of their comrades from the
inundated mine. They had pierced through thirty-two yards of coal
in order to reach their entombed comrades; but when only three
yards more remained to be pierced, fire-damp enveloped them. The
lamps went out, and the rescue-men retired. To work in such
conditions was to risk being blown up at every moment. But the
raps of the entombed miners were still heard, the men were still
alive and appealed for help, and several miners volunteered to
work at any risk; and as they went down the mine, their wives had
only silent tears to follow them--not one word to stop them.

There is the gist of human psychology. Unless men are
maddened in the battlefield, they "cannot stand it" to hear
appeals for help, and not to respond to them. The hero goes; and
what the hero does, all feel that they ought to have done as
well. The sophisms of the brain cannot resist the mutual-aid
feeling, because this feeling has been nurtured by thousands of
years of human social life and hundreds of thousands of years of
pre-human life in societies.

"But what about those men who were drowned in the Serpentine
in the presence of a crowd, out of which no one moved for their
rescue?" it may be asked. "What about the child which fell into
the Regent's Park Canal--also in the presence of a holiday
crowd--and was only saved through the presence of mind of a
maid who let out a Newfoundland dog to the rescue?" The answer is
plain enough. Man is a result of both his inherited instincts and
his education. Among the miners and the seamen, their common
occupations and their every-day contact with one another create a
feeling of solidarity, while the surrounding dangers maintain
courage and pluck. In the cities, on the contrary, the absence of
common interest nurtures indifference, while courage and pluck,
which seldom find their opportunities, disappear, or take another
direction. Moreover, the tradition of the hero of the mine and
the sea lives in the miners' and fishermen's villages, adorned
with a poetical halo. But what are the traditions of a motley
London crowd? The only tradition they might have in common ought
to be created by literature, but a literature which would
correspond to the village epics hardly exists. The clergy are so
anxious to prove that all that comes from human nature is sin,
and that all good in man has a supernatural origin, that they
mostly ignore the facts which cannot be produced as an example of
higher inspiration or grace, coming from above. And as to the
lay-writers, their attention is chiefly directed towards one sort
of heroism, the heroism which promotes the idea of the State.
Therefore, they admire the Roman hero, or the soldier in the
battle, while they pass by the fisherman's heroism, hardly paying
attention to it. The poet and the painter might, of course, be
taken by the beauty of the human heart in itself; but both seldom
know the life of the poorer classes, and while they can sing or
paint the Roman or the military hero in conventional
surroundings, they can neither sing nor paint impressively the
hero who acts in those modest surroundings which they ignore. If
they venture to do so, they produce a mere piece of
rhetoric.(14)

The countless societies, clubs, and alliances, for the
enjoyment of life, for study and research, for education, and so
on, which have lately grown up in such numbers that it would
require many years to simply tabulate them, are another
manifestation of the same everworking tendency for association
and mutual support. Some of them, like the broods of young birds
of different species which come together in the autumn, are
entirely given to share in common the joys of life. Every village
in this country, in Switzerland, Germany, and so on, has its
cricket, football, tennis, nine-pins, pigeon, musical or singing
clubs. Other societies are much more numerous, and some of them,
like the Cyclists' Alliance, have suddenly taken a formidable
development. Although the members of this alliance have nothing
in common but the love of cycling, there is already among them a
sort of freemasonry for mutual help, especially in the remote
nooks and corners which are not flooded by cyclists; they look
upon the "C.A.C."--the Cyclists' Alliance Club--in a village
as a sort of home; and at the yearly Cyclists' Camp many a
standing friendship has been established. The Kegelbruder, the
Brothers of the Nine Pins, in Germany, are a similar association;
so also the Gymnasts' Societies (300,000 members in Germany), the
informal brotherhood of paddlers in France, the yacht clubs, and
so on. Such associations certainly do not alter the economical
stratification of society, but, especially in the small towns,
they contribute to smooth social distinctions, and as they all
tend to join in large national and international federations,
they certainly aid the growth of personal friendly intercourse
between all sorts of men scattered in different parts of the
globe.

The Alpine Clubs, the Jagdschutzverein in Germany, which has
over 100,000 members--hunters, educated foresters, zoologists,
and simple lovers of Nature--and the International
Ornithological Society, which includes zoologists, breeders, and
simple peasants in Germany, have the same character. Not only
have they done in a few years a large amount of very useful work,
which large associations alone could do properly (maps, refuge
huts, mountain roads; studies of animal life, of noxious insects,
of migrations of birds, and so on), but they create new bonds
between men. Two Alpinists of different nationalities who meet in
a refuge hut in the Caucasus, or the professor and the peasant
ornithologist who stay in the same house, are no more strangers
to each other; while the Uncle Toby's Society at Newcastle, which
has already induced over 260,000 boys and girls never to destroy
birds' nests and to be kind to all animals, has certainly done
more for the development of human feelings and of taste in
natural science than lots of moralists and most of our schools.

We cannot omit, even in this rapid review, the thousands of
scientific, literary, artistic, and educational societies. Up
till now, the scientific bodies, closely controlled and often
subsidized by the State, have generally moved in a very narrow
circle, and they often came to be looked upon as mere openings
for getting State appointments, while the very narrowness of
their circles undoubtedly bred petty jealousies. Still it is a
fact that the distinctions of birth, political parties and creeds
are smoothed to some extent by such associations; while in the
smaller and remote towns the scientific, geographical, or musical
societies, especially those of them which appeal to a larger
circle of amateurs, become small centres of intellectual life, a
sort of link between the little spot and the wide world, and a
place where men of very different conditions meet on a footing of
equality. To fully appreciate the value of such centres, one
ought to know them, say, in Siberia. As to the countless
educational societies which only now begin to break down the
State's and the Church's monopoly in education, they are sure to
become before long the leading power in that branch. To the
"Froebel Unions" we already owe the Kindergarten system; and to a
number of formal and informal educational associations we owe the
high standard of women's education in Russia, although all the
time these societies and groups had to act in strong opposition
to a powerful government.(15) As to the various pedagogical
societies in Germany, it is well known that they have done the
best part in the working out of the modern methods of teaching
science in popular schools. In such associations the teacher
finds also his best support. How miserable the overworked and
under-paid village teacher would have been without their
aid!(16)

All these associations, societies, brotherhoods, alliances,
institutes, and so on, which must now be counted by the ten
thousand in Europe alone, and each of which represents an immense
amount of voluntary, unambitious, and unpaid or underpaid work--
what are they but so many manifestations, under an infinite
variety of aspects, of the same ever-living tendency of man
towards mutual aid and support? For nearly three centuries men
were prevented from joining hands even for literary, artistic,
and educational purposes. Societies could only be formed under
the protection of the State, or the Church, or as secret
brotherhoods, like free-masonry. But now that the resistance has
been broken, they swarm in all directions, they extend over all
multifarious branches of human activity, they become
international, and they undoubtedly contribute, to an extent
which cannot yet be fully appreciated, to break down the screens
erected by States between different nationalities.
Notwithstanding the jealousies which are bred by commercial
competition, and the provocations to hatred which are sounded by
the ghosts of a decaying past, there is a conscience of
international solidarity which is growing both among the leading
spirits of the world and the masses of the workers, since they
also have conquered the right of international intercourse; and
in the preventing of a European war during the last quarter of a
century, this spirit has undoubtedly had its share.

The religious charitable associations, which again represent
a whole world, certainly must be mentioned in this place. There
is not the slightest doubt that the great bulk of their members
are moved by the same mutual-aid feelings which are common to all
mankind. Unhappily the religious teachers of men prefer to
ascribe to such feelings a supernatural origin. Many of them
pretend that man does not consciously obey the mutual-aid
inspiration so long as he has not been enlightened by the
teachings of the special religion which they represent, and, with
St. Augustin, most of them do not recognize such feelings in the
"pagan savage." Moreover, while early Christianity, like all
other religions, was an appeal to the broadly human feelings of
mutual aid and sympathy, the Christian Church has aided the State
in wrecking all standing institutions of mutual aid and support
which were anterior to it, or developed outside of it; and,
instead of the mutual aid which every savage considers as due to
his kinsman, it has preached charity which bears a character of
inspiration from above, and, accordingly, implies a certain
superiority of the giver upon the receiver. With this limitation,
and without any intention to give offence to those who consider
themselves as a body elect when they accomplish acts simply
humane, we certainly may consider the immense numbers of
religious charitable associations as an outcome of the same
mutual-aid tendency.

All these facts show that a reckless prosecution of personal
interests, with no regard to other people's needs, is not the
only characteristic of modern life. By the side of this current
which so proudly claims leadership in human affairs, we perceive
a hard struggle sustained by both the rural and industrial
populations in order to reintroduce standing institutions of
mutual aid and support; and we discover, in all classes of
society, a widely-spread movement towards the establishment of an
infinite variety of more or less permanent institutions for the
same purpose. But when we pass from public life to the private
life of the modern individual, we discover another extremely wide
world of mutual aid and support, which only passes unnoticed by
most sociologists because it is limited to the narrow circle of
the family and personal friendship.(17)

Under the present social system, all bonds of union among the
inhabitants of the same street or neighbourhood have been
dissolved. In the richer parts of the large towns, people live
without knowing who are their next-door neighbours. But in the
crowded lanes people know each other perfectly, and are
continually brought into mutual contact. Of course, petty
quarrels go their course, in the lanes as elsewhere; but
groupings in accordance with personal affinities grow up, and
within their circle mutual aid is practised to an extent of which
the richer classes have no idea. If we take, for instance, the
children of a poor neighbourhood who play in a street or a
churchyard, or on a green, we notice at once that a close union
exists among them, notwithstanding the temporary fights, and that
that union protects them from all sorts of misfortunes. As soon
as a mite bends inquisitively over the opening of a drain--
"Don't stop there," another mite shouts out, "fever sits in the
hole!" "Don't climb over that wall, the train will kill you if
you tumble down! Don't come near to the ditch! Don't eat those
berries--poison! you will die." Such are the first teachings
imparted to the urchin when he joins his mates out-doors. How
many of the children whose play-grounds are the pavements around
"model workers' dwellings," or the quays and bridges of the
canals, would be crushed to death by the carts or drowned in the
muddy waters, were it not for that sort of mutual support. And
when a fair Jack has made a slip into the unprotected ditch at
the back of the milkman's yard, or a cherry-cheeked Lizzie has,
after all, tumbled down into the canal, the young brood raises
such cries that all the neighbourhood is on the alert and rushes
to the rescue.

Then comes in the alliance of the mothers. "You could not
imagine" (a lady-doctor who lives in a poor neighbourhood told me
lately) "how much they help each other. If a woman has prepared
nothing, or could prepare nothing, for the baby which she
expected--and how often that happens!--all the neighbours
bring something for the new-comer. One of the neighbours always
takes care of the children, and some other always drops in to
take care of the household, so long as the mother is in bed."
This habit is general. It is mentioned by all those who have
lived among the poor. In a thousand small ways the mothers
support each other and bestow their care upon children that are
not their own. Some training--good or bad, let them decide it
for themselves--is required in a lady of the richer classes to
render her able to pass by a shivering and hungry child in the
street without noticing it. But the mothers of the poorer classes
have not that training. They cannot stand the sight of a hungry
child; they must feed it, and so they do. "When the school
children beg bread, they seldom or rather never meet with a
refusal"--a lady-friend, who has worked several years in
Whitechapel in connection with a workers' club, writes to me. But
I may, perhaps, as well transcribe a few more passages from her
letter:--

"Nursing neighbours, in cases of illness, without any shade
of remuneration, is quite general among the workers. Also, when a
woman has little children, and goes out for work, another mother
always takes care of them.

"If, in the working classes, they would not help each other,
they could not exist. I know families which continually help each
other--with money, with food, with fuel, for bringing up the
little children, in cases of illness, in cases of death.

"'The mine' and 'thine' is much less sharply observed among
the poor than among the rich. Shoes, dress, hats, and so on,--
what may be wanted on the spot--are continually borrowed from
each other, also all sorts of household things.

"Last winter the members of the United Radical Club had
brought together some little money, and began after Christmas to
distribute free soup and bread to the children going to school.
Gradually they had 1,800 children to attend to. The money came
from outsiders, but all the work was done by the members of the
club. Some of them, who were out of work, came at four in the
morning to wash and to peel the vegetables; five women came at
nine or ten (after having done their own household work) for
cooking, and stayed till six or seven to wash the dishes. And at
meal time, between twelve and half-past one, twenty to thirty
workers came in to aid in serving the soup, each one staying what
he could spare of his meal time. This lasted for two months. No
one was paid."

My friend also mentions various individual cases, of which
the following are typical:--

"Annie W. was given by her mother to be boarded by an old
person in Wilmot Street. When her mother died, the old woman, who
herself was very poor, kept the child without being paid a penny
for that. When the old lady died too, the child, who was five
years old, was of course neglected during her illness, and was
ragged; but she was taken at once by Mrs. S., the wife of a
shoemaker, who herself has six children. Lately, when the husband
was ill, they had not much to eat, all of them.

"The other day, Mrs. M., mother of six children, attended
Mrs. M--g throughout her illness, and took to her own rooms the
elder child.... But do you need such facts? They are quite
general.... I know also Mrs. D. (Oval, Hackney Road), who has a
sewing machine and continually sews for others, without ever
accepting any remuneration, although she has herself five
children and her husband to look after.... And so on."

For every one who has any idea of the life of the labouring
classes it is evident that without mutual aid being practised
among them on a large scale they never could pull through all
their difficulties. It is only by chance that a worker's family
can live its lifetime without having to face such circumstances
as the crisis described by the ribbon weaver, Joseph Gutteridge,
in his autobiography.(18) And if all do not go to the ground in
such cases, they owe it to mutual help. In Gutteridge's case it
was an old nurse, miserably poor herself, who turned up at the
moment when the family was slipping towards a final catastrophe,
and brought in some bread, coal, and bedding, which she had
obtained on credit. In other cases, it will be some one else, or
the neighbours will take steps to save the family. But without
some aid from other poor, how many more would be brought every
year to irreparable ruin!(19)

Mr. Plimsoll, after he had lived for some time among the
poor, on 7s. 6d. a week, was compelled to recognize that the
kindly feelings he took with him when he began this life "changed
into hearty respect and admiration" when he saw how the relations
between the poor are permeated with mutual aid and support, and
learned the simple ways in which that support is given. After a
many years' experience, his conclusion was that" when you come to
think of it, such as these men were, so were the vast majority of
the working classes."(20) As to bringing up orphans, even by the
poorest families, it is so widely-spread a habit, that it may be
described as a general rule; thus among the miners it was found,
after the two explosions at Warren Vale and at Lund Hill, that
"nearly one-third of the men killed, as the respective committees
can testify, were thus supporting relations other than wife and
child." "Have you reflected," Mr. Plimsoll added, "what this is?
Rich men, even comfortably-to-do men do this, I don't doubt. But
consider the difference." Consider what a sum of one shilling,
subscribed by each worker to help a comrade's widow, or 6d. to
help a fellow-worker to defray the extra expense of a funeral,
means for one who earns 16s. a week and has a wife, and in some
cases five or six children to support.(21) But such
subscriptions are a general practice among the workers all over
the world, even in much more ordinary cases than a death in the
family, while aid in work is the commonest thing in their lives.

Nor do the same practices of mutual aid and support fail
among the richer classes. Of course, when one thinks of the
harshness which is often shown by the richer employers towards
their employees, one feels inclined to take the most pessimist
view of human nature. Many must remember the indignation which
was aroused during the great Yorkshire strike of 1894, when old
miners who had picked coal from an abandoned pit were prosecuted
by the colliery owners. And, even if we leave aside the horrors
of the periods of struggle and social war, such as the
extermination of thousands of workers' prisoners after the fall
of the Paris Commune--who can read, for instance, revelations
of the labour inquest which was made here in the forties, or what
Lord Shaftesbury wrote about "the frightful waste of human life
in the factories, to which the children taken from the
workhouses, or simply purchased all over this country to be sold
as factory slaves, were consigned"(22)--who can read that
without being vividly impressed by the baseness which is possible
in man when his greediness is at stake? But it must also be said
that all fault for such treatment must not be thrown entirely
upon the criminality of human nature. Were not the teachings of
men of science, and even of a notable portion of the clergy, up
to a quite recent time, teachings of distrust, despite and almost
hatred towards the poorer classes? Did not science teach that
since serfdom has been abolished, no one need be poor unless for
his own vices? And how few in the Church had the courage to blame
the children-killers, while the great numbers taught that the
sufferings of the poor, and even the slavery of the negroes, were
part of the Divine Plan! Was not Nonconformism itself largely a
popular protest against the harsh treatment of the poor at the
hand of the established Church?

With such spiritual leaders, the feelings of the richer
classes necessarily became, as Mr. Pimsoll remarked, not so much
blunted as "stratified." They seldom went downwards towards the
poor, from whom the well-to-do-people are separated by their
manner of life, and whom they do not know under their best
aspects, in their every-day life. But among themselves--
allowance being made for the effects of the wealth-accumulating
passions and the futile expenses imposed by wealth itself--
among themselves, in the circle of family and friends, the rich
practise the same mutual aid and support as the poor. Dr. Ihering
and L. Dargun are perfectly right in saying that if a statistical
record could be taken of all the money which passes from hand to
hand in the shape of friendly loans and aid, the sum total would
be enormous, even in comparison with the commercial transactions
of the world's trade. And if we could add to it, as we certainly
ought to, what is spent in hospitality, petty mutual services,
the management of other people's affairs, gifts and charities, we
certainly should be struck by the importance of such transfers in
national economy. Even in the world which is ruled by commercial
egotism, the current expression, "We have been harshly treated by
that firm," shows that there is also the friendly treatment, as
opposed to the harsh, i.e. the legal treatment; while every
commercial man knows how many firms are saved every year from
failure by the friendly support of other firms.

As to the charities and the amounts of work for general
well-being which are voluntarily done by so many well-to-do
persons, as well as by workers, and especially by professional
men, every one knows the part which is played by these two
categories of benevolence in modern life. If the desire of
acquiring notoriety, political power, or social distinction often
spoils the true character of that sort of benevolence, there is
no doubt possible as to the impulse coming in the majority of
cases from the same mutual-aid feelings. Men who have acquired
wealth very often do not find in it the expected satisfaction.
Others begin to feel that, whatever economists may say about
wealth being the reward of capacity, their own reward is
exaggerated. The conscience of human solidarity begins to tell;
and, although society life is so arranged as to stifle that
feeling by thousands of artful means, it often gets the upper
hand; and then they try to find an outcome for that deeply human
need by giving their fortune, or their forces, to something
which, in their opinion, will promote general welfare.

In short, neither the crushing powers of the centralized
State nor the teachings of mutual hatred and pitiless struggle
which came, adorned with the attributes of science, from obliging
philosophers and sociologists, could weed out the feeling of
human solidarity, deeply lodged in men's understanding and heart,
because it has been nurtured by all our preceding evolution. What
was the outcome of evolution since its earliest stages cannot be
overpowered by one of the aspects of that same evolution. And the
need of mutual aid and support which had lately taken refuge in
the narrow circle of the family, or the slum neighbours, in the
village, or the secret union of workers, re-asserts itself again,
even in our modern society, and claims its rights to be, as it
always has been, the chief leader towards further progress. Such
are the conclusions which we are necessarily brought to when we
carefully ponder over each of the groups of facts briefly
enumerated in the last two chapters.

NOTES:

1. Toulmin Smith, English Guilds, London, 1870, Introd. p. xliii.

2. The Act of Edward the Sixth--the first of his reign--
ordered to hand over to the Crown "all fraternities,
brotherhoods, and guilds being within the realm of England and
Wales and other of the king's dominions; and all manors, lands,
tenements, and other hereditaments belonging to them or any of
them" (English Guilds, Introd. p. xliii). See also Ockenkowski's
Englands wirtschaftliche Entwickelung im Ausgange des
Mittelalters, Jena, 1879, chaps. ii-v.

3. See Sidney and Beatrice Webb, History of Trade-Unionism,
London, 1894, pp. 21-38.

4. See in Sidney Webb's work the associations which existed at
that time. The London artisans are supposed to have never been
better organized than in 1810-20.

5. The National Association for the Protection of Labour included
about 150 separate unions, which paid high levies, and had a
membership of about 100,000. The Builders' Union and the Miners'
Unions also were big organizations (Webb, l.c. p. 107).

6. I follow in this Mr. Webb's work, which is replete with
documents to confirm his statements.

7. Great changes have taken place since the forties in the
attitude of the richer classes towards the unions. However, even
in the sixties, the employers made a formidable concerted attempt
to crush them by locking out whole populations. Up to 1869 the
simple agreement to strike, and the announcement of a strike by
placards, to say nothing of picketing, were often punished as
intimidation. Only in 1875 the Master and Servant Act was
repealed, peaceful picketing was permitted, and "violence and
intimidation" during strikes fell into the domain of common law.
Yet, even during the dock-labourers' strike in 1887, relief money
had to be spent for fighting before the Courts for the right of
picketing, while the prosecutions of the last few years menace
once more to render the conquered rights illusory.

8. A weekly contribution of 6d. out of an 18s. wage, or of 1s.
out of 25s., means much more than 9l. out of a 300l. income: it
is mostly taken upon food; and the levy is soon doubled when a
strike is declared in a brother union. The graphic description of
trade-union life, by a skilled craftsman, published by Mr. and
Mrs. Webb (pp. 431 seq.), gives an excellent idea of the amount
of work required from a unionist.

9. See the debates upon the strikes of Falkenau in Austria before
the Austrian Reichstag on the 10th of May, 1894, in which debates
the fact is fully recognized by the Ministry and the owner of the
colliery. Also the English Press of that time.

10. Many such facts will be found in the Daily Chronicle and
partly the Daily News for October and November 1894.

11. The 31,473 productive and consumers' associations on the
Middle Rhine showed, about 1890, a yearly expenditure of
18,437,500l.; 3,675,000l. were granted during the year in loans.

12. British Consular Report, April 1889.

13. A capital research on this subject has been published in
Russian in the Zapiski (Memoirs) of the Caucasian Geographical
Society, vol. vi. 2, Tiflis, 1891, by C. Egiazaroff.

14. Escape from a French prison is extremely difficult;
nevertheless a prisoner escaped from one of the French prisons in
1884 or 1885. He even managed to conceal himself during the whole
day, although the alarm was given and the peasants in the
neighbourhood were on the look-out for him. Next morning found
him concealed in a ditch, close by a small village. Perhaps he
intended to steal some food, or some clothes in order to take off
his prison uniform. As he was lying in the ditch a fire broke out
in the village. He saw a woman running out of one of the burning
houses, and heard her desperate appeals to rescue a child in the
upper storey of the burning house. No one moved to do so. Then
the escaped prisoner dashed out of his retreat, made his way
through the fire, and, with a scalded face and burning clothes,
brought the child safe out of the fire, and handed it to its
mother. Of course he was arrested on the spot by the village
gendarme, who now made his appearance. He was taken back to the
prison. The fact was reported in all French papers, but none of
them bestirred itself to obtain his release. If he had shielded a
warder from a comrade's blow. he would have been made a hero of.
But his act was simply humane, it did not promote the State's
ideal; he himself did not attribute it to a sudden inspiration of
divine grace; and that was enough to let the man fall into
oblivion. Perhaps, six or twelve months were added to his
sentence for having stolen--"the State's property"--the
prison's dress.

15. The medical Academy for Women (which has given to Russia a
large portion of her 700 graduated lady doctors), the four
Ladies' Universities (about 1000 pupils in 1887; closed that
year, and reopened in 1895), and the High Commercial School for
Women are entirely the work of such private societies. To the
same societies we owe the high standard which the girls' gymnasia
attained since they were opened in the sixties. The 100 gymnasia
now scattered over the Empire (over 70,000 pupils), correspond to
the High Schools for Girls in this country; all teachers are,
however, graduates of the universities.

16. The Verein fur Verbreitung gemeinnutslicher Kenntnisse,
although it has only 5500 members, has already opened more than
1000 public and school libraries, organized thousands of
lectures, and published most valuable books.

17. Very few writers in sociology have paid attention to it. Dr.
Ihering is one of them, and his case is very instructive. When
the great German writer on law began his philosophical work, Der
Zweck im Rechte ("Purpose in Law"), he intended to analyze "the
active forces which call forth the advance of society and
maintain it," and to thus give "the theory of the sociable man."
He analyzed, first, the egotistic forces at work, including the
present wage-system and coercion in its variety of political and
social laws; and in a carefully worked-out scheme of his work he
intended to give the last paragraph to the ethical forces--the
sense of duty and mutual love--which contribute to the same
aim. When he came, however, to discuss the social functions of
these two factors, he had to write a second volume, twice as big
as the first; and yet he treated only of the personal factors
which will take in the following pages only a few lines. L.
Dargun took up the same idea in Egoismus und Altruismus in der
Nationalokonomie, Leipzig, 1885, adding some new facts. Buchner's
Love, and the several paraphrases of it published here and in
Germany, deal with the same subject.

18. Light and Shadows in the Life of an Artisan. Coventry, 1893.

19. Many rich people cannot understand how the very poor can help
each other, because they do not realize upon what infinitesimal
amounts of food or money often hangs the life of one of the
poorest classes. Lord Shaftesbury had understood this terrible
truth when he started his Flowers and Watercress Girls' Fund, out
of which loans of one pound, and only occasionally two pounds,
were granted, to enable the girls to buy a basket and flowers
when the winter sets in and they are in dire distress. The loans
were given to girls who had "not a sixpence," but never failed to
find some other poor to go bail for them. "Of all the movements I
have ever been connected with," Lord Shaftesbury wrote, "I look
upon this Watercress Girls' movement as the most successful....
It was begun in 1872, and we have had out 800 to 1,000 loans, and
have not lost 50l. during the whole period.... What has been lost--
and it has been very little, under the circumstances--has
been by reason of death or sickness, not by fraud" (The Life and
Work of the Seventh Earl of Shaftesbury, by Edwin Hodder, vol.
iii. p. 322. London, 1885-86). Several more facts in point in Ch.
Booth's Life and Labour in London, vol. i; in Miss Beatrice
Potter's "Pages from a Work Girl's Diary" (Nineteenth Century,
September 1888, p. 310); and so on.

20. Samuel Plimsoll, Our Seamen, cheap edition, London, 1870, p.
110.

21. Our Seamen, u.s., p. 110. Mr. Plimsoll added: "I don't wish
to disparage the rich, but I think it may be reasonably doubted
whether these qualities are so fully developed in them; for,
notwithstanding that not a few of them are not unacquainted with
the claims, reasonable or unreasonable, of poor relatives, these
qualities are not in such constant exercise. Riches seem in so
many cases to smother the manliness of their possessors, and
their sympathies become, not so much narrowed as--so to speak--
stratified: they are reserved for the sufferings of their own
class, and also the woes of those above them. They seldom tend
downwards much, and they are far more likely to admire an act of
courage... than to admire the constantly exercised fortitude and
the tenderness which are the daily characteristics of a British
workman's life"--and of the workmen all over the world as well.

22. Life of the Seventh Earl of Shaftesbury, by Edwin Hodder,
vol. i. pp. 137-138.

CONCLUSION

If we take now the teachings which can be borrowed from the
analysis of modern society, in connection with the body of
evidence relative to the importance of mutual aid in the
evolution of the animal world and of mankind, we may sum up our
inquiry as follows.

In the animal world we have seen that the vast majority of
species live in societies, and that they find in association the
best arms for the struggle for life: understood, of course, in
its wide Darwinian sense--not as a struggle for the sheer means
of existence, but as a struggle against all natural conditions
unfavourable to the species. The animal species, in which
individual struggle has been reduced to its narrowest limits, and
the practice of mutual aid has attained the greatest development,
are invariably the most numerous, the most prosperous, and the
most open to further progress. The mutual protection which is
obtained in this case, the possibility of attaining old age and
of accumulating experience, the higher intellectual development,
and the further growth of sociable habits, secure the maintenance
of the species, its extension, and its further progressive
evolution. The unsociable species, on the contrary, are doomed to
decay.

Going next over to man, we found him living in clans and
tribes at the very dawn of the stone age; we saw a wide series of
social institutions developed already in the lower savage stage,
in the clan and the tribe; and we found that the earliest tribal
customs and habits gave to mankind the embryo of all the
institutions which made later on the leading aspects of further
progress. Out of the savage tribe grew up the barbarian village
community; and a new, still wider, circle of social customs,
habits, and institutions, numbers of which are still alive among
ourselves, was developed under the principles of common
possession of a given territory and common defence of it, under
the jurisdiction of the village folkmote, and in the federation
of villages belonging, or supposed to belong, to one stem. And
when new requirements induced men to make a new start, they made
it in the city, which represented a double network of territorial
units (village communities), connected with guilds these latter
arising out of the common prosecution of a given art or craft, or
for mutual support and defence.

And finally, in the last two chapters facts were produced to
show that although the growth of the State on the pattern of
Imperial Rome had put a violent end to all medieval institutions
for mutual support, this new aspect of civilization could not
last. The State, based upon loose aggregations of individuals and
undertaking to be their only bond of union, did not answer its
purpose. The mutual-aid tendency finally broke down its iron
rules; it reappeared and reasserted itself in an infinity of
associations which now tend to embrace all aspects of life and to
take possession of all that is required by man for life and for
reproducing the waste occasioned by life.

It will probably be remarked that mutual aid, even though it
may represent one of the factors of evolution, covers
nevertheless one aspect only of human relations; that by the side
of this current, powerful though it may be, there is, and always
has been, the other current--the self-assertion of the
individual, not only in its efforts to attain personal or caste
superiority, economical, political, and spiritual, but also in
its much more important although less evident function of
breaking through the bonds, always prone to become crystallized,
which the tribe, the village community, the city, and the State
impose upon the individual. In other words, there is the
self-assertion of the individual taken as a progressive element.

It is evident that no review of evolution can be complete,
unless these two dominant currents are analyzed. However, the
self-assertion of the individual or of groups of individuals,
their struggles for superiority, and the conflicts which resulted
therefrom, have already been analyzed, described, and glorified
from time immemorial. In fact, up to the present time, this
current alone has received attention from the epical poet, the
annalist, the historian, and the sociologist. History, such as it
has hitherto been written, is almost entirely a description of
the ways and means by which theocracy, military power, autocracy,
and, later on, the richer classes' rule have been promoted,
established, and maintained. The struggles between these forces
make, in fact, the substance of history. We may thus take the
knowledge of the individual factor in human history as granted--
even though there is full room for a new study of the subject on
the lines just alluded to; while, on the other side, the
mutual-aid factor has been hitherto totally lost sight of; it was
simply denied, or even scoffed at, by the writers of the present
and past generation. It was therefore necessary to show, first of
all, the immense part which this factor plays in the evolution of
both the animal world and human societies. Only after this has
been fully recognized will it be possible to proceed to a
comparison between the two factors.

To make even a rough estimate of their relative importance by
any method more or less statistical, is evidently impossible. One
single war--we all know--may be productive of more evil,
immediate and subsequent, than hundreds of years of the unchecked
action of the mutual-aid principle may be productive of good. But
when we see that in the animal world, progressive development and
mutual aid go hand in hand, while the inner struggle within the
species is concomitant with retrogressive development; when we
notice that with man, even success in struggle and war is
proportionate to the development of mutual aid in each of the two
conflicting nations, cities, parties, or tribes, and that in the
process of evolution war itself (so far as it can go this way)
has been made subservient to the ends of progress in mutual aid
within the nation, the city or the clan--we already obtain a
perception of the dominating influence of the mutual-aid factor
as an element of progress. But we see also that the practice of
mutual aid and its successive developments have created the very
conditions of society life in which man was enabled to develop
his arts, knowledge, and intelligence; and that the periods when
institutions based on the mutual-aid tendency took their greatest
development were also the periods of the greatest progress in
arts, industry, and science. In fact, the study of the inner life
of the medieval city and of the ancient Greek cities reveals the
fact that the combination of mutual aid, as it was practised
within the guild and the Greek clan, with a large initiative
which was left to the individual and the group by means of the
federative principle, gave to mankind the two greatest periods of
its history--the ancient Greek city and the medieval city
periods; while the ruin of the above institutions during the
State periods of history, which followed, corresponded in both
cases to a rapid decay.

As to the sudden industrial progress which has been achieved
during our own century, and which is usually ascribed to the
triumph of individualism and competition, it certainly has a much
deeper origin than that. Once the great discoveries of the
fifteenth century were made, especially that of the pressure of
the atmosphere, supported by a series of advances in natural
philosophy--and they were made under the medieval city
organization,--once these discoveries were made, the invention
of the steam-motor, and all the revolution which the conquest of
a new power implied, had necessarily to follow. If the medieval
cities had lived to bring their discoveries to that point, the
ethical consequences of the revolution effected by steam might
have been different; but the same revolution in technics and
science would have inevitably taken place. It remains, indeed, an
open question whether the general decay of industries which
followed the ruin of the free cities, and was especially
noticeable in the first part of the eighteenth century, did not
considerably retard the appearance of the steam-engine as well as
the consequent revolution in arts. When we consider the
astounding rapidity of industrial progress from the twelfth to
the fifteenth centuries--in weaving, working of metals,
architecture and navigation, and ponder over the scientific
discoveries which that industrial progress led to at the end of
the fifteenth century--we must ask ourselves whether mankind
was not delayed in its taking full advantage of these conquests
when a general depression of arts and industries took place in
Europe after the decay of medieval civilization. Surely it was
not the disappearance of the artist-artisan, nor the ruin of
large cities and the extinction of intercourse between them,
which could favour the industrial revolution; and we know indeed
that James Watt spent twenty or more years of his life in order
to render his invention serviceable, because he could not find in
the last century what he would have readily found in medieval
Florence or Brugge, that is, the artisans capable of realizing
his devices in metal, and of giving them the artistic finish and
precision which the steam-engine requires.

To attribute, therefore, the industrial progress of our
century to the war of each against all which it has proclaimed,
is to reason like the man who, knowing not the causes of rain,
attributes it to the victim he has immolated before his clay
idol. For industrial progress, as for each other conquest over
nature, mutual aid and close intercourse certainly are, as they
have been, much more advantageous than mutual struggle.

However, it is especially in the domain of ethics that. the
dominating importance of the mutual-aid principle appears in
full. That mutual aid is the real foundation of our ethical
conceptions seems evident enough. But whatever the opinions as to
the first origin of the mutual-aid feeling or instinct may be
whether a biological or a supernatural cause is ascribed to it--
we must trace its existence as far back as to the lowest stages
of the animal world; and from these stages we can follow its
uninterrupted evolution, in opposition to a number of contrary
agencies, through all degrees of human development, up to the
present times. Even the new religions which were born from time
to time--always at epochs when the mutual-aid principle was
falling into decay in the theocracies and despotic States of the
East, or at the decline of the Roman Empire--even the new
religions have only reaffirmed that same principle. They found
their first supporters among the humble, in the lowest,
downtrodden layers of society, where the mutual-aid principle is
the necessary foundation of every-day life; and the new forms of
union which were introduced in the earliest Buddhist and
Christian communities, in the Moravian brotherhoods and so on,
took the character of a return to the best aspects of mutual aid
i n early tribal life.

Each time, however, that an attempt to return to this old
principle was made, its fundamental idea itself was widened. From
the clan it was extended to the stem, to the federation of stems,
to the nation, and finally--in ideal, at least--to the whole
of mankind. It was also refined at the same time. In primitive
Buddhism, in primitive Christianity, in the writings of some of
the Mussulman teachers, in the early movements of the Reform, and
especially in the ethical and philosophical movements of the last
century and of our own times, the total abandonment of the idea
of revenge, or of "due reward"--of good for good and evil for
evil--is affirmed more and more vigorously. The higher
conception of "no revenge for wrongs," and of freely giving more
than one expects to receive from his neighbours, is proclaimed as
being the real principle of morality--a principle superior to
mere equivalence, equity, or justice, and more conducive to
happiness. And man is appealed to to be guided in his acts, not
merely by love, which is always personal, or at the best tribal,
but by the perception of his oneness with each human being. In
the practice of mutual aid, which we can retrace to the earliest
beginnings of evolution, we thus find the positive and undoubted
origin of our ethical conceptions; and we can affirm that in the
ethical progress of man, mutual support not mutual struggle--
has had the leading part. In its wide extension, even at the
present time, we also see the best guarantee of a still loftier
evolution of our race.




End of the Project Gutenberg Etext of Mutual Aid, by P. Kropotkin

