The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Red Planet
by William J. Locke
(#2 in our series by William J. Locke)

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before distributing this or any other
Project Gutenberg file.

We encourage you to keep this file, exactly as it is, on your
own disk, thereby keeping an electronic path open for future
readers.  Please do not remove this.

This header should be the first thing seen when anyone starts to
view the etext. Do not change or edit it without written permission.
The words are carefully chosen to provide users with the
information they need to understand what they may and may not
do with the etext.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These Etexts Are Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get etexts, and
further information, is included below.  We need your donations.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a 501(c)(3)
organization with EIN [Employee Identification Number] 64-6221541



Title: The Red Planet

Author: William J. Locke

Release Date: July, 2003  [Etext #4287]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on December 30, 2001]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Red Planet
by William J. Locke
******This file should be named rplan10.txt or rplan10.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, rplan11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, rplan10a.txt

Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

Project Gutenberg Etexts are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep etexts in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our etexts one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
etexts, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any Etext before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2001 as we release over 50 new Etext
files per month, or 500 more Etexts in 2000 for a total of 4000+
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
should reach over 300 billion Etexts given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 4,000 Etexts.  We need
funding, as well as continued efforts by volunteers, to maintain
or increase our production and reach our goals.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of November, 2001, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Arkansas, Connecticut, Delaware,
Florida, Georgia, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oklahoma, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin,
and Wyoming.

*In Progress

We have filed in about 45 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

All donations should be made to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fundraising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fundraising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etexts,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this etext,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the etext,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.10/04/01*END*




Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.

THE RED PLANET

BY WILLIAM J. LOCKE

AUTHOR OF "THE WONDERFUL YEAH," "JAFFERY,"
"THE BELOVED VAGABOND," ETC.

   Not only over death strewn plains,
      Fierce mid the cold white stars,
   But over sheltered vales of home,
      Hides the Red Planet Mars.





THE RED PLANET





CHAPTER I


"Lady Fenimore's compliments, sir, and will you be so kind as to
step round to Sir Anthony at once?"

Heaven knows that never another step shall I take in this world
again; but Sergeant Marigold has always ignored the fact. That is
one of the many things I admire about Marigold. He does not throw
my poor paralysed legs, so to speak, in my face. He accepts them
as the normal equipment of an employer. I don't know what I should
do without Marigold. ... You see we were old comrades in the South
African War, where we both got badly knocked to pieces. He was
Sergeant in my battery, and the same Boer shell did for both of
us. At times we join in cursing that shell heartily, but I am not
sure that we do not hold it in sneaking affection. It initiated us
into the brotherhood of death. Shortly afterwards when we had
crossed the border-line back into life, we exchanged, as tokens,
bits of the shrapnel which they had extracted from our respective
carcases. I have not enquired what he did with his bit; but I keep
mine in a certain locked drawer. ... There were only the two of us
left on the gun when we were knocked out. ... I should like to
tell you the whole story, but you wouldn't listen to me. And no
wonder. In comparison with the present world convulsion in which
the slaughtered are reckoned by millions, the Boer War seems a
trumpery affair of bows and arrows. I am a back-number. Still,
back-numbers have their feelings--and their memories.

I sometimes wonder, as I sit in this wheel-chair, with my
abominable legs dangling down helplessly, what Sergeant Marigold
thinks of me. I know what I think of Marigold. I think him the
ugliest devil that God ever created and further marred after
creating him. He is a long, bony creature like a knobbly ram-rod,
and his face is about the colour and shape of a damp, mildewed
walnut. To hide a bald head into which a silver plate has been
fixed, he wears a luxuriant curly brown wig, like those that used
to adorn waxen gentlemen in hair-dressing windows. His is one of
those unhappy moustaches that stick out straight and scanty like a
cat's. He has the slit of a letter-box mouth of the Irishman in
caricature, and only half a dozen teeth spaced like a skeleton
company. Nothing will induce him to procure false ones. It is a
matter of principle. Between the wearing of false hair and the
wearing of false teeth he makes a distinction of unfathomable
subtlety. He is an obstinate beast. If he wasn't he would not,
with four fingers of his right hand shot away, have remained with
me on that gun. In the same way, neither tears nor entreaties nor
abuse have induced him to wear a glass eye. On high days and
holidays, whenever he desires to look smart and dashing, he covers
the unpleasing orifice with a black shade. In ordinary workaday
life he cares not how much he offends the aesthetic sense. But the
other eye, the sound left eye, is a wonder--the precious jewel set
in the head of the ugly toad. It is large, of ultra-marine blue,
steady, fearless, humorous, tender--everything heroic and
beautiful and romantic you can imagine about eyes. Let him clap a
hand over that eye and you will hold him the most dreadful ogre
that ever escaped out of a fairy tale. Let him clap a hand over
the other eye and look full at you out of the good one and you
will think him the Knightliest man that ever was--and in my poor
opinion, you would not be far wrong.

So, out of this nightmare of a face, the one beautiful eye of
Sergeant Marigold was bent on me, as he delivered his message.

I thrust back my chair from the writing-table.

"Is Sir Anthony ill?"

"He rode by the gate an hour ago looking as well as either you or
me, sir."

"That's not very reassuring," said I.

Marigold did not take up the argument. "They've sent the car for
you, sir."

"In that case," said I, "I'll start immediately."

Marigold wheeled my chair out of the room and down the passage to
the hall, where he fitted me with greatcoat and hat. Then, having
trundled me to the front gate, he picked me up--luckily I have
always been a small spare man--and deposited me in the car. I am
always nervous of anyone but Marigold trying to carry me. They
seem to stagger and fumble and bungle. Marigold's arms close round
me like an iron clamp and they lift me with the mechanical
certainty of a crane.

He jumped up beside the chauffeur and we drove off.

Perhaps when I get on a little further I may acquire the trick of
telling a story. At present I am baffled by the many things that
clamour for prior record. Before bringing Sir Anthony on the
scene, I feel I ought to say something more about myself, to
explain why Lady Fenimore should have sent for me in so peremptory
a fashion. Following the model of my favourite author Balzac--you
need the awful leisure that has been mine to appreciate him--I
ought to describe the house in which I live, my establishment--
well, I have begun with Sergeant Marigold--and the little country
town which is practically the scene of the drama in which were
involved so many bound to me by close ties of friendship and
affection.

I ought to explain how I come to be writing this at all.

Well, to fill in my time, I first started by a diary--a sort of
War Diary of Wellingsford, the little country town in question.
Then things happened with which my diary was inadequate to cope.
Everyone came and told me his or her side of the story. All
through, I found thrust upon me the parts of father-confessor,
intermediary, judge, advocate, and conspirator.... For look you,
what kind of a life can a man lead situated as I am? The crowning
glory of my days, my wife, is dead. I have neither chick nor
child. No brothers or sisters, dead or alive. The Bon Dieu and
Sergeant Marigold (the latter assisted by his wife and a maid or
two) look after my creature comforts. What have I in the world to
do that is worth doing save concern myself with my country and my
friends?

With regard to my country, in these days of war, I do what I can.
Until finally flattened out by the War Office, I pestered them for
such employment as a cripple might undertake. As an instance of
what a paralytic was capable I quoted Couthon, member of the
National Convention and the Committee of Public Safety. You can
see his chair, not very unlike mine, in the Musee Carnavalet in
Paris. Perhaps that is where I blundered. The idea of a shrieking
revolutionary in Whitehall must have sent a cold shiver down their
spines. In the meanwhile, I serve on as many War Committees in
Wellingsford as is physically possible for Sergeant Marigold to
get me into. I address recruiting meetings. I have taken earnest
young Territorial artillery officers in courses of gunnery. You
know they work with my own beloved old fifteen pounders, brought
up to date with new breeches, recoils, shields, and limbers. For
months there was a brigade in Wellings Park, and I used to watch
their drill. I was like an old actor coming once again before the
footlights.... Of course it was only in the mathematics of the
business that I could be of any help, and doubtless if the War
Office had heard of the goings on in my study, they would have
dropped severely on all of us. Still, I taught them lots of things
about parabolas that they did not know and did not know were to be
known--things that, considering the shells they fired went in
parabolas, ought certainly to be known by artillery officers; so I
think, in this way, I have done a little bit for my country.

With regard to my friends, God has given me many in this quiet
market town--once a Sleepy Hollow awakened only on Thursdays by
bleating sheep and lowing cattle and red-faced men in gaiters and
hard felt hats; its life flowing on drowsily as the gaudily
painted barges that are towed on the canal towards which, in
scattered buildings, it drifts aimlessly; a Sleepy Hollow with one
broad High Street, melting gradually at each end through shops,
villas, cottages, into the King's Highway, yet boasting in its
central heart a hundred yards or so of splendour, where the
truculent new red brick Post Office sneers across the flagged
market square at the new Portland-stone Town Hall, while the old
thatched corn-market sleeps in the middle and the Early English
spire of the Norman church dreams calmly above them. Once, I say,
a Sleepy Hollow, but now alive with the tramp of soldiers and the
rumble of artillery and transport; for Wellingsford is the centre
of a district occupied by a division, which means twenty thousand
men of all arms, and the streets and roads swarm with men in
khaki, and troops are billeted in all the houses. The War has
changed many aspects, but not my old friendships. I had made a
home here during my soldiering days, long before the South African
War, my wife being a kinswoman of Sir Anthony, and so I have grown
into the intimacy of many folks around. And, as they have been
more than good to me, surely I must give them of my best in the
way of sympathy and counsel. So it is in no spirit of curiosity
that I have pried into my friends' affairs. They have become my
own, very vitally my own; and this book is a record of things as I
know them to have happened.

My name is Meredyth, with a "Y," as my poor mother used proudly to
say, though what advantage a "Y" has over an "I," save that of a
swaggering tail, I have always been at a loss to determine; Major
Duncan Meredyth, late R.F.A., aged forty-seven; and I live in a
comfortable little house at the extreme north end of the High
Street, standing some way back from the road; so that in fine
weather I can sit in my front garden and watch everybody going
into the town. And whenever any of my friends pass by, it is their
kindly habit to cast an eye towards my gate, and, if I am visible,
to pass the time of day with me for such time as they can spare.

Years ago, when first I realised what would be my fate for the
rest of my life, I nearly broke my heart. But afterwards, whether
owing to the power of human adaptability or to the theory of
compensation, I grew to disregard my infirmity. By building a
series of two or three rooms on to the ground floor of the house,
so that I could live in it without the need of being carried up
and down stairs, and by acquiring skill in the manipulation of my
tricycle chair, I can get about the place pretty much as I choose.
And Marigold is my second self. So, in spite of the sorrow and
grief incident to humanity of which God has given me my share, I
feel that my lot is cast in pleasant places and I am thankful.

The High Street, towards its southern extremity, takes a sudden
bend, forming what the French stage directions call a pan coupe.
On the inner angle are the gates of Wellings Park, the residence
of Sir Anthony Fenimore, third baronet, and the most considerable
man in our little community. Through these gates the car took me
and down the long avenue of chestnut trees, the pride of a
district braggart of its chestnuts and its beeches, but now
leafless and dreary, spreading out an infinite tracery of branch
and twig against a grey February sky. Thence we emerged into the
open of rolling pasture and meadow on the highest ground of which
the white Georgian house was situated. As we neared the house I
shivered, not only with the cold, but with a premonition of
disaster. For why should Lady Fenimore have sent for me to see Sir
Anthony, when he, strong and hearty, could have sent for me
himself, or, for the matter of that, could have visited me at my
own home? The house looked stark and desolate. And when we drew up
at the front door and Pardoe, the elderly butler, appeared, his
face too looked stark and desolate.

Marigold lifted me out and carried me up the steps and put me into
a chair like my own which the Fenimores have the goodness to keep
in a hall cupboard for my use.

"What's the matter, Pardoe?" I asked.

"Sir Anthony and her ladyship will tell you, sir. They're in the
morning room."

So I was shewn into the morning room--a noble square room with
French windows, looking on to the wintry garden, and with a log
fire roaring up a great chimney. On one side of the fire sat Sir
Anthony, and on the other, Lady Fenimore. And both were crying. He
rose as he saw me--a short, crop-haired, clean-shaven, ruddy,
jockey-faced man of fifty-five, the corners of his thin lips,
usually curled up in a cheery smile, now piteously drawn down, and
his bright little eyes now dim like those of a dead bird. She,
buxom, dark, without a grey hair in her head, a fine woman defying
her years, buried her face in her hands and sobbed afresh.

"It's good of you to come, old man," said Sir Anthony, "but you're
in it with us."

He handed me a telegram. I knew, before reading it, what message
it contained. I had known, all along, but dared not confess it to
myself.

"I deeply regret to inform you that your son, Lieutenant Oswald
Fenimore, was killed in action yesterday while leading his men
with the utmost gallantry."

I had known him since he was a child. By reason of my wife's
kinship, I was "Uncle Duncan." He was just one and twenty, but a
couple of years out of Sandhurst. Only a week before I had
received an exuberant letter from him extolling his men as "super-
devil-angels," and imploring me if I loved him and desired to
establish the supremacy of British arms, to send him some of Mrs.
Marigold's potted shrimp.

And now, there he was dead; and, if lucky, buried with a little
wooden cross with his name rudely inscribed, marking his grave.

I reached out my hand.

"My poor old Anthony!"

He jerked his head and glance towards his wife and wheeled me to
her side, so that I could put my hand on her shoulder.

"It's bitter hard, Edith, but--"

"I know, I know. But all the same--"

"Well, damn it all!" cried Sir Anthony, in a quavering voice, "he
died like a man and there's nothing more to be said."

Presently he looked at his watch.

"By George," said he, "I've only just time to get to my
Committee."

"What Committee?" I asked.

"The Lord Lieutenant's. I promised to take the chair."

For the first time Lady Fenimore lifted her stricken face.

"Are you going, Anthony?"

"The boy didn't shirk his duty. Why should I?"

She looked at him squarely and the most poignant simulacrum of a
smile I have ever seen flitted over her lips.

"Why not, darling? Duncan will keep me company till you come
back."

He kissed his wife, a trifle more demonstratively than he had ever
done in alien presence, and with a nod at me, went out of the
room.

And suddenly she burst into sobbing again.

"I know it's wrong and wicked and foolish," she said brokenly.
"But I can't help it. Oh, God! I can't help it."

Then, like an ass, I began to cry, too; for I loved the boy, and
that perhaps helped her on a bit.





CHAPTER II


Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori. The tag has been all but
outworn during these unending days of death; it has become almost
a cant phrase which the judicious shrink from using. Yet to
hundreds of thousands of mourning men and women there has been
nothing but its truth to bring consolation. They are conscious of
the supreme sacrifice and thereby are ennobled. The cause in which
they made it becomes more sacred. The community of grief raises
human dignity. In England, at any rate, there are no widows of
Ashur. All are silent in their lamentations. You see little black
worn in the public ways. The Fenimores mourned for their only son,
the idol of their hearts; but the manifestation of their grief was
stoical compared with their unconcealed desolation on the occasion
of a tragedy that occurred the year before.

Towards the end of the preceding June their only daughter, Althea,
had been drowned in the canal. Here was a tragedy unrelieved,
stupid, useless. Here was no consoling knowledge of glorious
sacrifice; no dying for one's country. There was no dismissing it
with a heroic word that caught in the throat.

I have not started out to write this little chronicle of
Wellingsford in order to weep over the pain of the world. God
knows there is in it an infinity of beauty, fresh revelations of
which are being every day unfolded before my eyes.

If I did not believe with all my soul that out of Darkness cometh
Light, I would take my old service revolver from its holster and
blow out my brains this very minute. The eternal laughter of the
earth has ever since its creation pierced through the mist of
tears in which at times it has been shrouded. What has been will
be. Nay, more, what has been shall be. It is the Law of what I
believe to be God.... As a concrete instance, where do you find a
fuller expression of the divine gaiety of the human spirit than in
the Houses of Pain, strewn the length and breadth of the land,
filled with maimed and shattered men who have looked into the jaws
of Hell? If it comes to that, I have looked into them myself, and
have heard the heroic jests of men who looked with me.

For some years up to the outbreak of the war which has knocked all
so-called modern values silly, my young friends, with a certain
respectful superciliousness, regarded me as an amiable person
hopelessly out of date. Now that we are at grip with elementals, I
find myself, if anything, in advance of the fashion. This,
however, by the way. What I am clumsily trying to explain is that
if I am to make this story intelligible I must start from the
darkness where its roots lie hidden. And that darkness is the
black depths of the canal by the lock gates where Althea
Fenimore's body was found.

It was high June, in leafy England, in a world at peace. Can one
picture it? With such a wrench of memory does one recall scenes of
tender childhood. In the shelter of a stately house lived Althea
Fenimore. She was twenty-one; pretty, buxom, like her mother,
modern, with (to me) a pathetic touch of mid-Victorian softness
and sentimentality; independent in outward action, what we call
"open-air"; yet an anomaly, fond at once of games and babies. I
have seen her in the morning tearing away across country by the
side of her father, the most passionate and reckless rider to
hounds in the county, and in the evening I have come across her, a
pretty mass of pink flesh and muslin--no, it can't be muslin--say
chiffon--anyhow, something white and filmy and girlish--curled up
on a sofa and absorbed in a novel of Mrs. Henry Wood, borrowed, if
one could judge by the state of its greasy brown paper cover, from
the servants' hall. I confess that, though to her as to her
brother I was "Uncle Duncan," and loved her as a dear, sweet
English girl, I found her lacking in spirituality, in intellectual
grasp, in emotional distinction. I should have said that she was
sealed by God to be the chaste, healthy, placid mother of men. She
was forever laughing--just the spontaneous laughter of the
gladness of life.

On the last afternoon of her existence she came to see me,
bringing me a basket of giant strawberries from her own particular
bed. We had tea in the garden, and with her young appetite she
consumed half the fruit she had brought. At the time I did not
notice an unusual touch of depression. I remember her holding by
its stalk a great half-eaten strawberry and asking me whether
sometimes I didn't find life rather rotten. I said idly:

"You can't expect the world to be a peach without a speck on it.
Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. The wise person avoids the
specks."

"But suppose you've bitten a specky bit by accident?"

"Spit it out," said I.

She laughed. "You think you're like the wise Uncle in the Sunday
School books, don't you?"

"I know I am," I said.

Whereupon she laughed again, finished the strawberry, and changed
the conversation.

There seemed to be no foreshadowing of tragedy in that. I had
known her (like many of her kind) to proclaim the rottenness of
the Universe when she was off her stroke at golf, or when a
favourite young man did not appear at a dance. I attributed no
importance to it. But the next day I remembered. What was she
doing after half-past ten o'clock, when she had bidden her father
and mother goodnight, on the steep and lonely bank of the canal,
about a mile and a half away? No one had seen her leave the house.
No one, apparently, had seen her walking through the town. Nothing
was known of her until dawn when they found her body by the lock
gate. She had been dead some hours. It was a mysterious affair,
upon which no light was thrown at the inquest. No one save myself
had observed any sign of depression, and her half-bantering talk
with me was trivial enough. No one could adduce a reason for her
midnight walk on the tow-path. The obvious question arose. Whom
had she gone forth to meet? What man? There was not a man in the
neighbourhood with whom her name could be particularly associated.
Generally, it could be associated with a score or so. The modern
young girl of her position and upbringing has a drove of young
male intimates. With one she rides, with another she golfs, with
another she dances a two-step, with another she Bostons; she will
let Tom read poetry to her, although, as she expresses it, "he
bores her stiff," because her sex responds to the tribute; she
plays lady patroness to Dick, and tries to intrigue him into a
soft job; and as for Harry she goes on telling him month after
month that unless he forswears sack and lives cleanly she will
visit him with her high displeasure. Meanwhile, most of these
satellites have affaires de coeur of their own, some respectable,
others not; they regard the young lady with engaging frankness as
a woman and a sister, they have the run of her father's house, and
would feel insulted if anybody questioned the perfect correctness
of their behaviour. Each man has, say, half a dozen houses where
he is welcomed on the same understanding. Of course, when one
particular young man and one particular young woman read lunatic
things in each other's eyes, then the rest of the respective
quasi-sisters and quasi-brothers have to go hang. (In parenthesis,
I may state that the sisters are more ruthlessly sacrificed than
the brothers.) At any rate, frankness is the saving quality of the
modern note.

In the case of Althea, there had been no sign of such
specialisation. She could not have gone forth, poor child, to meet
the twenty with whom she was known to be on terms of careless
comradeship. She had gone from her home, driven by God knows what
impulse, to walk in the starlight--there was no moon--along the
banks of the canal. In the darkness, had she missed her footing
and stepped into nothingness and the black water? The Coroner's
Jury decided the question in the affirmative. They brought in a
verdict of death by misadventure. And up to the date on which I
begin this little Chronicle of Wellingsford, namely that of the
summons to Wellings Park, when I heard of the death of young
Oswald Fenimore, that is all I knew of the matter.

Throughout July my friends were like dead people. There was
nothing that could be said to them by way of consolation. The sun
had gone out of their heaven. There was no light in the world.
Having known Death as a familiar foe, and having fought against
its terrors; having only by the grace of God been able to lift up
a man's voice in my hour of awful bereavement, and cry, "O Death,
where is thy sting, O Grave, thy Victory?" I could suffer with
them and fear for their reason. They lived in a state of coma,
unaware of life, performing, like automata, their daily tasks.

Then, in the early days of August, came the Trumpet of War, and
they awakened. In my life have I seen nothing so marvellous. No
broken spell of enchantment in an Arabian tale when dead warriors
spring into life was ever more instant and complete. They arose in
their full vigour; the colour came back to their cheeks and the
purpose into their eyes. They laughed once more. Their days were
filled with work and cheerfulness. In November Sir Anthony was
elected Mayor. Being a practical, hard-headed little man, loved
and respected by everybody, he drove a hitherto contentious Town
Council into paths of high patriotism like a flock of sheep. And
no less energy did Lady Fenimore exhibit in the sphere of her own
activities.

A few days after the tidings came of Oswald's death, Sir Anthony
was riding through the town and pulled up before Perkins' the
fishmonger's. Perkins emerged from his shop and crossed the
pavement.

"I hear you've had bad news."

"Yes, indeed, Sir Anthony."

"I'm sorry. He was a fine fellow. So was my boy. We're in the same
boat, Perkins."

Perkins assented. "It sort of knocks one's life to bits, doesn't
it?" said he. "We've nothing left."

"We have our country."

"Our country isn't our only son," said the other dully.

"No. She's our mother," said Sir Anthony.

"Isn't that a kind of abstraction?"

"Abstraction!" cried Sir Anthony, indignantly. "You must be
imbibing the notions of that poisonous beast Gedge."

Gedge was a smug, socialistic, pacifist builder who did not hold
with war--and with this one least of all, which he maintained was
being waged for the exclusive benefit of the capitalist classes.
In the eyes of the stalwarts of Wellingsford, he was a horrible
fellow, capable of any stratagem or treason.

Perkins flushed. "I've always voted conservative, like my father
before me, Sir Anthony, and like yourself I've given my boy to my
country. I've no dealings with unpatriotic people like Gedge, as
you know very well."

"Of course I do," cried Sir Anthony. "And that's why I ask you
what the devil you mean by calling England an abstraction. For us,
she's the only thing in the world. We're elderly chaps, you and I,
Perkins, and the only thing we can do to help her is to keep our
heads high. If people like you and me crumple up, the British
Empire will crumple up."

"That's quite true," said Perkins.

Sir Anthony bent down and held out his hand.

"It's damned hard lines for us, and for the women. But we must
keep our end up. It's doing our bit."

Perkins wrung his hand. "I wish to God," said he, "I was young
enough--"

"By God! so do I!" said Sir Anthony.

This little conversation (which I afterwards verified) was
reported to me by my arch-gossip, Sergeant Marigold.

"And I tell you what, sir," said he after the conclusion, "I'm of
the same way of thinking and feeling."

"So am I."

"Besides, I'm not so old, sir. I'm only forty-two."

"The prime of life," said I.

"Then why won't they take me, sir?"

If there had been no age limit and no medical examination Marigold
would have re-enlisted as John Smith, on the outbreak of war,
without a moment's consideration of the position of his wife and
myself. And Mrs. Marigold, a soldier's wife of twenty years'
standing, would have taken it, just like myself, as a matter of
course. But as he could not re-enlist, he pestered the War Office
(just as I did) and I pestered for him to give him military
employment. And all in vain.

"Why don't they take me, sir? When I see these fellows with three
stripes on their arms, and looking at them and wondering at them
as if they were struck three stripes by lightning, and calling
themselves Sergeants and swanking about and letting their men
waddle up to their gun like cows--and when I see them, as I've
done with your eyes--watch one of their men pass by an officer in
the street without saluting, and don't kick the blighter to--to--
to barracks--it fairly makes me sick. And I ask myself, sir, what
I've done that I should be loafing here instead of serving my
country."

"You've somehow mislaid an eye and a hand and gone and got a tin
head. That's what you've done," said I. "And the War Office has a
mark against you as a damned careless fellow."

"Tin head or no tin head," he grumbled, "I could teach those
mother's darlings up there the difference between a battery of
artillery and a skittle-ally."

"I believe you've mentioned the matter to them already," I
observed softly.

Marigold met my eye for a second and then looked rather sheepish.
I had heard of a certain wordy battle between him and a
Territorial Sergeant whom he had set out to teach. Marigold
encountered a cannonade of blasphemous profanity, new, up-to-date,
scientific, against which the time-worn expletives in use during
his service days were ineffectual. He was routed with heavy loss.

"This is a war of the young," I continued. "New men, new guns, new
notions. Even a new language," I insinuated.

"I wish 'em joy of their language," said Marigold. Then seeing
that I was mildly amusing myself at his expense, he asked me
stiffly if there was anything more that he could do for me, and on
my saying no, he replied "Thank you, sir," most correctly and left
the room.

On the 3d of March Betty Fairfax came to tea.

Of all the young women of Wellingsford she was my particular
favourite. She was so tall and straight, with a certain Rosalind
boyishness about her that made for charm. I am not yet, thank
goodness, one of the fossils who hold up horror-stricken hands at
the independent ways of the modern young woman. If it were not for
those same independent ways the mighty work that English women are
doing in this war would be left undone. Betty Fairfax was breezily
independent. She had a little money of her own and lived, when it
suited her, with a well-to-do and comfortable aunt. She was two
and twenty. I shall try to tell you more about her, as I go on.

As I have said, and as my diary tells me, she came to tea on the
3d of March. She was looking particularly attractive that
afternoon. Shaded lamps and the firelight of a cosy room, with all
their soft shadows, give a touch of mysterious charm to a pretty
girl. Her jacket had a high sort of Medici collar edged with fur,
which set off her shapely throat. The hair below her hat was soft
and brown. Her brows were wide, her eyes brown and steady, nose
and lips sensitive. She had a way of throwing back her head and
pointing her chin fearlessly, as though in perpetual declaration
that she cared not a hang either for black-beetles or Germans. And
she was straight as a dart, with the figure of a young Diana--
Diana before she began to worry her head about beauty
competitions. A kind of dark hat stuck at a considerable angle on
her head gave her the prettiest little swaggering air in the
world. ... Well, there was I, a small, brown, withered, grizzled,
elderly, mustachioed monkey, chained to my wheel-chair; there were
the brave logs blazing up the wide chimney; there was the tea
table on my right with its array of silver and old china; and
there, on the other side of it, attending to my wants, sat as
brave and sweet a type of young English womanhood as you could
find throughout the length and breadth of the land. Had I not been
happy, I should have been an ungrateful dog.

We talked of the war, of local news, of the wounded at the
hospital.

And here I must say that we are very proud of our Wellingsford
Hospital. It is the largest and the wealthiest in the county. We
owe it to the uneasy conscience of a Wellingsford man, a railway
speculator in the forties, who, having robbed widows and orphans
and, after trial at the Old Bailey, having escaped penal servitude
by the skin of his teeth, died in the odour of sanctity, and the
possessor of a colossal fortune in the year eighteen sixty-three.
This worthy gentleman built the hospital and endowed it so
generously that a wing of it has been turned into a military
hospital with forty beds. I have the honour to serve on the
Committee. Betty Fairfax entered as a Probationer early in
September, and has worked there night and day ever since. That is
why we chatted about the wounded. Having a day off, she had
indulged in the luxury of pretty clothes. Of these I had duly
expressed my admiration.

Tea over, she lit a cigarette for me and one for herself and drew
her chair a trifle nearer the fire. After a little knitting of the
brow, she said:--

"You haven't asked me why I invited myself to tea."

"I thought," said I, "it was for my beaux yeux."

"Not this time. I rather wanted you to be the first to receive a
certain piece of information."

I glanced at her sharply. "You don't mean to say you're going to
be married at last?"

In some astonishment she retorted:--

"How did you guess?"

"Holy simplicity!" said I. "You told me so yourself."

She laughed. Suddenly, on reflection, her face changed.

"Why did you say 'at last'?"

"Well--" said I, with a significant gesture.

She made a defiant announcement:--

"I am going to marry Willie Connor."

"It was my turn to be astonished. "Captain Connor?" I echoed.

"Yes. What have you to say against him?"

"Nothing, my dear, nothing."

And I hadn't. He was an exemplary young fellow, a Captain in a
Territorial regiment that had been in hard training in the
neighbourhood since August. He was of decent family and
upbringing, a barrister by profession, and a comely pink-faced boy
with a fair moustache. He brought a letter or two of introduction,
was billeted on Mrs. Fairfax, together with one of his subs, and
was made welcome at various houses. Living under the same roof as
Betty, it was natural that he should fall in love with her. But it
was not at all natural that she should fall in love with him. She
was not one of the kind that suffer fools gladly. ... No; I had
nothing against Willie Connor. He was merely a common-place,
negative young man; patriotic, keen in his work, an excellent
soldier, and, as far as I knew, of blameless life; but having met
him two or three times in general company, I had found him a dull
dog, a terribly dull dog,--the last man in the world for Betty
Fairfax.

And then there was Leonard Boyce. I naturally had him in my head,
when I used the words "at last."

"You don't seem very enthusiastic," said Betty.

"You've taken me by surprise," said I. "I'm not young enough to be
familiar with these sudden jerks."

"You thought it was Major Boyce."

"I did, Betty. True, you've said nothing about it to me for ever
so long, and when I have asked you for news of him your answers
have shewed me that all was not well. But you've never told me, or
anyone, that the engagement was broken off."

Her young face was set sternly as she looked into the fire.

"It's not broken off--in the formal sense. Leonard thought fit to
let it dwindle, and it has dwindled until it has perished of
inanition." She flashed round. "I'm not the sort to ask any man
for explanations."

"Boyce went out with the first lot in August," I said. "He has had
seven awful months. Mons and all the rest of it. You must excuse a
man in the circumstances for not being aux petits soins des dames.
And he seems to be doing magnificently--twice mentioned in
dispatches."

"I know all that," she said. "I'm not a fool. But the war has
nothing to do with it. It started a month before the war broke
out. Don't let us talk of it."

She threw the end of her cigarette into the fire and lit a fresh
one. I accepted the action as symbolical. I dismissed Boyce, and
said:--

"And so you're engaged to Captain Connor?"

"More than that," she laughed. "I'm going to marry him. He's going
out next week. It's idiotic to have an engagement. So I'm going to
marry him the day after to-morrow."

Now here was a piece of news, all flung at my head in a couple of
minutes. The day after to-morrow! I asked for the reason of this
disconcerting suddenness.

"He's going out next week."

"My dear," said I, "I have known you for a very long time--and I
suppose it's because I'm such a very old friend that you've come
to tell me all about it. So I can talk to you frankly. Have you
considered the terrible chances of this war? Heaven knows what may
happen. He may be killed."

"That's why I'm marrying him," she said.

There was a little pause. For the moment I had nothing to say, as
I was busily searching for her point of view. Then, with pauses
between each sentence, she went on:--

"He asked me two months ago, and again a month ago. I told him to
put such ideas out of his head. Yesterday he told me they were off
to the front and said what a wonderful help it would be to him if
he could carry away some hope of my love. So I gave it to him."--
She threw back her head and looked at me, with flushed cheeks.
"The love, not the hope."

"I don't think it was right of him to press for an immediate
marriage," said I, in a grandfatherly way--though God knows if I
had been mad for a girl I should have done the same myself when I
was young.

"He didn't" said Betty, coolly. "It was all my doing. I fixed it
up there and then. Looked up Whitaker's Almanack for the necessary
information, and sent him off to get a special license."

I nodded a non-committal head. It all seemed rather mad. Betty
rose and from her graceful height gazed down on me.

"If you don't look more cheerful, Major, I shall cry. I've never
done so yet, but I'm sure I've got it in me."

I stretched out my hand. She took it, and, still holding it,
seated herself on a footstool close to my chair.

"There are such a lot of things that occur to me," I said. "Things
that your poor mother, if she were alive, would be more fitted to
touch on than myself."

"Such as--"

She knelt by me and gave me both her hands. It was a pretty way
she had. She had begun it soon after her head overtopped mine in
my eternal wheelbarrow. There was a little mockery in her eyes.

"Well--" said I. "You know what marriage means. There is the
question of children."

She broke into frank laughter.

"My darling Majy--" That is the penalty one pays for admitting
irresponsible modern young people into one's intimacy. They
miscall one abominably. I thought she had outgrown this childish,
though affectionate appellation of disrespect. "My darling Majy!"
she said. "Children! How many do you think I'm going to have?"

I was taken aback. There was this pure, proud, laughing young face
a foot away from me. I said in desperation:--

"You know very well what I mean, young woman. I want to put things
clearly before you--" It is the most difficult thing in the world
for a man--even without legs--to talk straight about the facts of
life to a young girl. He has no idea how much she knows about them
and how much she doesn't. To tear away veils and reveal
frightening starkness is an act from which he shrinks with all the
modesty of a (perhaps) deluded sex. I took courage. "I want," I
repeated, "to put things clearly before you. You are marrying this
young man. You will have a week's married life. He goes away like
a gallant fellow to fight for his country. He may be killed in the
course of the next few weeks. Like a brave girl you've got to face
it. In the course of time a child may be born--without a father
to look after him. It's a terrific responsibility."

She knelt upright and put both her hands on my shoulders, almost
embracing me, and the laughter died away from her eyes, giving
place to something which awakened memories of what I had seen once
or twice in the eyes of the dearest of all women. She put her face
very close to mine and whispered:

"Don't you see, dear, it's in some sort of way because of that?
Don't you think it would be awful for a strong, clean, brave
English life like his to go out without leaving behind him someone
to--well, you know what I mean--to carry on the same traditions--
to be the same clean brave Englishman in the future?"

I smiled and nodded. Quite a different kind of nod from the
previous one.

"Thousands of girls are doing it, you dear old Early Victorian,
and aren't ashamed to say so to those who really love and can
understand them. And you do love and understand, don't you?"

She set me off at arm's length, and held me with her bright
unflinching eyes.

"I do, my dear," said I. "But there's only one thing that troubles
me. Marriage is a lifelong business. Captain Connor may win
through to a green old age. I hope to God the gallant fellow will.
Your present motives are beautiful and heroic. But do you care for
him sufficiently to pass a lifetime with him--after the war--an
ordinary, commonplace lifetime?"

With the same clear gaze full on me she said:--

"Didn't I tell you that I had given him my love?"

"You did."

"Then," she retorted with a smile, "my dear Major Didymus, what
more do you want?"

"Nothing, my dear Betty."

I kissed her. She threw her arms round my neck and kissed me
again. Sergeant Marigold entered on the sentimental scene and
preserved a face of wood. Betty rose to her feet slowly and
serenely and smiled at Marigold.

"Miss Fairfax's car," he announced.

"Marigold," said I, "Miss Fairfax is going to be married the day
after to-morrow to Captain Connor of the--"

"I know, sir," interrupted my one-eyed ramrod. "I'm very glad, if
I may be permitted to say so, Miss. I've made it my duty to
inspect all the troops that have been quartered hereabouts during
the last eight months. And Captain Connor is one of the few that
really know their business. I shouldn't at all mind to serve under
him. I can't say more, Miss. I wish you happiness."

She flushed and laughed and looked adorable, and held out her
hand, which he enclosed in his great left fist.

"And you'll come to my wedding, Sergeant?"

"I will, Miss," said he. "With considerable pleasure."





CHAPTER III


When I want to shew how independent I am of everybody, I drive
abroad in my donkey carriage. I am rather proud of my donkey, a
lithe-limbed pathetically eager little beast, deep bay with white
tips to his ears. Marigold bought him for me last spring, from
some gipsies, when his predecessor, Dan, who had served me
faithfully for some years, struck work and insisted on an old-age
pension. He is called Hosea, a name bestowed on him, by way of
clerical joke, and I am sure with a profane reminiscence of
Jorrocks, by the Vicar, because he "came after Daniel." At first I
thought it rather silly; but when I tried to pull him up I found
that "Whoa-Ho-sea!" came in rather pat; so Hosea he has remained.
He has quite a fast, stylish little trot, and I can square my
elbows and cock my head on one side as I did in the days of my
youth when the brief ownership of a tandem and a couple of
thoroughbreds would have landed me in the bankruptcy court, had it
not mercifully first landed me in the hospital.

The afternoon after Betty's visit, I took Hosea to Wellings Park.
The Fenimores shewed me a letter they had received from Oswald's
Colonel, full of praise of the gallant boy, and after discussing
it, which they did with brave eyes and voices, Sir Anthony said:--

"I want your advice, Duncan, on a matter that has been worrying us
both. Briefly it is this. When Oswald came of age I promised to
allow him a thousand a year till I should be wiped out and he
should come in. Now I'm only fifty-five and as strong as a horse.
I can reasonably expect to live, say, another twenty years. If
Oswald were alive I should owe him, in prospectu, twenty thousand
pounds. He has given his life for his country. His country,
therefore, is his heir, comes in for his assets, his twenty years'
allowance--"

"And the whole of your estate at your death?" I interposed.

"No. Not at all," said he. "At my death, it would have been his to
dispose of as he pleased. Up to my death, he would have had no
more claim to deal with it than you have. Look at things from my
point of view, and don't be idiotic. I am considering my debt to
Oswald, and therefore, logically, my debt to the country. It is
twenty thousand pounds. I'm going to pay it. The only question is
--and the question has kept Edith and myself awake the last two
nights--is what's the best thing to do with it? Of course I could
give it to some fund,--or several funds,--but it's a lot of money
and I should like it to be used to the best advantage. Now what do
you say?"

"I say," said I, "that you Croesuses make a half-pay Major of
Artillery's head reel. If I were like you, I should go into a shop
and buy a super-dreadnought, and stick a card on it with a
drawing pin, and send it to the Admiralty with my compliments."

"Duncan," said Lady Fenimore, severely, "don't be flippant."

Heaven knows I was in no flippant mood; but it was worth a foolish
jest to bring a smile to Sir Anthony's face. Also this grave,
conscientious proposition had its humorous side. It was so
British. It reminded me of the story of Swift, who, when Gay and
Pope visited him and refused to sup, totted up the cost of the
meal and insisted on their accepting half-a-crown apiece. It
reminded me too of the rugged old Lancashire commercial blood that
was in him--blood that only shewed itself on the rarest and
greatest of occasions--the blood of his grandfather, the
Manchester cotton-spinner, who founded the fortunes of his house.
Sir Anthony knew less about cotton than he did about ballistics
and had never sat at a desk in a business office for an hour in
his life; but now and again the inherited instinct to put high
impulses on a scrupulously honest commercial basis asserted itself
in the quaintest of fashions.

"There's some sense in what he says, Edith," remarked Sir Anthony.
"It's only vanity that prompted us to ear-mark this sum for
something special."

"Vanity!" cried Lady Fenimore. "You weren't by any chance thinking
of advertising our gift or contribution or whatever you like to
call it in the Daily Mail?"

"Heaven forbid, my dear," Sir Anthony replied warmly; and he
stood, his hands under his coat-tails and his gaitered legs
apart, regarding her with the air of a cock-sparrow accused of
murdering his young, or a sensitive jockey repudiating a
suggestion of crooked riding. "Heaven forbid!" he repeated. "Such
an idea never entered my head."

"Then where does the vanity come in?" asked Lady Fenimore.

They had their little argument. I lit a cigarette and let them
argue. In such cases, every married couple has its own queer and
private and particular and idiosyncratic way of coming to an
agreement. The third party who tries to foist on it his own
suggestion of a way is an imbecile. The dispute on the point of
vanity, charmingly conducted, ended by Sir Anthony saying
triumphantly:--

"Well, my dear, don't you see I'm right?" and by his wife replying
with a smile:--

"No, darling, I don't see at all. But since you feel like that,
there's nothing more to be said."

I was mildly enjoying myself. Perhaps I'm a bit of a cynic. I
broke in.

"I don't think it's vanity to see that you get your money's worth.
There's lots of legitimate fun in spending twenty thousand pounds
properly. It's too big to let other people manage or mis-manage.
Suppose you decided on motor-ambulances or hospital trains, for
instance, it would be your duty to see that you got the best and
most up-to-date ambulances or trains, with the least possible
profits, to contractors and middle-men."

"As far as that goes, I think I know my way about," said Sir
Anthony.

"Of course. And as for publicity--or the reverse, hiding your
light under a bushel--any fool can remain anonymous."

Sir Anthony nodded at me, rubbed his hands, and turned to his
wife.

"That's just what I was saying, Edith."

"My dear, that is just what I was trying to make you understand."

Neither of the two dear things had said, or given the other to
understand, anything of the kind. But you see they had come in
their own quaint married way to an agreement and were now
receptive of commonsense.

"The motor ambulance is a sound idea," said Sir Anthony, rubbing
his chin between thumb and forefinger.

"So is the hospital train," said Lady Fenimore.

What an idiot I was to suggest these alternatives! I looked at my
watch. It was getting late. Hosea, like a silly child, is afraid
of the dark. He just stands still and shivers at the night, and
the more he is belaboured the more he shivers, standing stock-
still with ears thrown back and front legs thrown forward. As I
can't get out and pull, I'm at the mercy of Hosea. And he knows
it. Since the mount of Balaam, there was never such an intelligent
idiot of an ass.

"What do you say?" asked Sir Anthony. "Ambulance or train?"

"Donkey carriage," said I. "This very moment minute."

I left them and trotted away homewards.

Just as I had turned a bend of the chestnut avenue near the Park
gates, I came upon a couple of familiar figures--familiar, that is
to say, individually, but startlingly unfamiliar in conjunction.
They were a young man and girl, Randall Holmes and Phyllis Gedge.
Randall had concluded a distinguished undergraduate career at
Oxford last summer. He was a man of birth, position, and, to a
certain extent, of fortune. Phyllis Gedge was the daughter, the
pretty and attractive daughter, of Daniel Gedge, the socialistic
builder who did not hold with war. What did young Randall mean by
walking in the dark with his arm round Phyllis's waist? Of course
as soon as he heard the click-clack of Hosea's hoofs he whipped
his arm away; but I had already caught him. They tried to look
mighty unconcerned as I pulled up. I took off my hat politely to
the lady and held out my hand to the young man.

"Good evening, Randall," said I. "I haven't seen you for ages."

He was a tall, clean-limbed, clear-featured boy, with black hair,
which though not long, yet lacked the military trimness befitting
the heads of young men at the present moment. He murmured
something about being busy.

"It will do you good to take a night off," I said; "drop in after
dinner and smoke a pipe with an old friend."

I smiled, bowed again politely, whipped up Hosea and trotted off.
I wondered whether he would come. He had said: "Delighted, I'm
sure," but he had not looked delighted. Very possibly he regarded
me as a meddlesome, gossiping old tom-cat. Perhaps for that reason
he would deem it wise to adopt a propitiatory attitude. Perhaps
also he retained a certain affectionate respect for me, seeing
that I had known him as a tiny boy in a sailor suit, and had fed
him at Harrow (as I did poor Oswald Fenimore at Wellington) with
Mrs. Marigold's famous potted shrimp and other comestibles, and
had put him up, during here and there holidays and later a
vacation, when his mother and aunts, with whom he lived, had gone
abroad to take inefficacious cures for the tedium of a futile
life. Oxford, however, had set him a bit off my plane.

As an ordinary soldierman, trained in the elementary virtues of
plain-speaking and direct dealing, love of country and the
sacredness of duty, I have had no use for the metaphysician. I
haven't the remotest notion what his jargon means. From Aristotle
to William James, I have dipped into quite a lot of them--
Descartes, Berkeley, Kant, Schopenhauer (the thrice besotted
Teutonic ass who said that women weren't beautiful), for I hate to
be thought an ignorant duffer--and I have never come across in
them anything worth knowing, thinking, or doing that I was not
taught at my mother's knee. And as for her, dear, simple soul, if
you had asked her what was the Categorical Imperative (having
explained beforehand the meaning of the words), she would have
said, "The Sermon on the Mount."

Of course, please regard this as a criticism not of the
metaphysicians and the philosophers, but of myself. All these
great thinkers have their niches in the Temple of Fame, and I'm
quite aware that the consensus of human judgment does not
immortalise even such an ass as Schopenhauer, without sufficient
reason. All I want to convey to you is that I am only a plain,
ordinary God-fearing, law-abiding Englishman, and that when young
Randall Holmes brought down from Oxford all sorts of highfalutin
theories about everything, not only in God's Universe, but in the
super-Universe that wasn't God's, and of every one of which he was
cocksure, I found my homely self very considerably out of it.

Then--young Randall was a poet. He had won the Newdigate. The
subject was Andrea del Sarto, one of my favourite painters--il
pittore senza errore--and his prize poem--it had, of course, to be
academic in form--was excellent. It said just the things about him
which Browning somehow missed, and which I had always been
impotently wanting to say. And a year or so afterwards--when I
praised his poem--he would shrink in a more than deprecating
attitude: I might just as well have extolled him for seducing the
wife of his dearest friend. His later poems, of which he was
immodestly proud--"Sensations Captured on the Wing," he defined
them--left me cold and unsympathetic. So, for these reasons, the
boy and I had drifted apart. Until I had caught him in flagrante
delicto of walking with his arm round the waist of pretty Phyllis
Gedge, I had not seen him to speak to for a couple of months.

He came, however, after dinner, looking very sleek and handsome
and intellectual, and wearing a velvet dinner jacket which I did
not like. After we had gossiped awhile:--

"You said you were very busy?" I remarked.

He flicked off his cigarette ash and nodded.

"What at?"

"War poetry," he replied. "I am trying to supply the real note. It
is badly wanted. There are all kinds of stuff being written, but
all indifferent and valueless. If it has a swing, it's merely
vulgar, and what isn't vulgar is academic, commonplace. There's a
crying need for the high level poetry that shall interpret with
dignity and nobility the meaning of the war."

"Have you written much?"

"I have an ode every week in the Albemarle Review. I also write
the political article. Didn't you know? Haven't you seen them?"

"I don't take in that periodical," said I. "The omniscience of the
last copy I saw dismayed me. I couldn't understand why the
Government were such insensate fools as not to move from Downing
Street to their Editorial offices."

Randall, with a humouring smile, defended the Albemarle Review.

"It is run," said he, "by a little set of intellectuals--some men
up with me at Oxford--who must naturally have a clearer vision
than men who have been living for years in the yellow fog of party
politics."

He expounded the godlike wisdom of young Oxford at some length,
replying vividly to here and there a Socratic interpolation on my
part. After a while I began to grow irritated. His talk, like his
verse, seemed to deal with unrealities. It was a negation of
everything, save the intellectual. If he and his friends had been
in power, there would never have been a war; there never would
have been a German menace; the lamb would have lain down in peace,
outside the lion. He had an airy way of dismissing the ruder and
more human aspects of the war. Said I:--

"Anyone can talk of what might have been. But that's all over and
done with. We're up against the tough proposition of the present.
What are you doing for it?"

He waved a hand. "That's just the point. The present doesn't
matter--not in the wide conception of things. It is the past and
the future that count. The present is mere fluidity."

"The poor devils up to their waists in water in the trenches would
agree with you," said I.

"They would also agree with me," he retorted, "if they had time to
go into the reconstruction of the future that we are
contemplating."

At this juncture Marigold came in with the decanters and syphons.
I noticed his one eye harden on the velvet dinner-jacket. He
fidgeted about the room, threw a log on the fire, drew the
curtains closer, always with an occasional malevolent glance at
the jacket. Then Randall, like a silly young ass, said, from the
depths of his easy chair, a very silly thing.

"I see you've not managed to get into khaki yet, Sergeant."

Marigold took a tactical pace or two to the door.

"Neither have you, sir," he said in a respectful tone, and went
out.

Randall laughed, though I saw his dark cheek flush. "If Marigold
had his way he would have us all in a barrack square."

"Preferably in those fluid trenches of the present," said I. "And
he wouldn't be far wrong."

My eyes rested on him somewhat stonily. People have complained
sometimes--defaulters, say, in the old days--that there can be a
beastly, nasty look in them.

"What do you mean, Major?" he asked.

"Sergeant Marigold," said I, "is a brave, patriotic Englishman who
has given his country all he can spare from the necessary physical
equipment to carry on existence; and it's making him hang-dog
miserable that he's not allowed to give the rest to-morrow. You
must forgive his plain speaking," I continued, gathering warmth as
I went on, "but he can't understand healthy young fellows like you
not wanting to do the same. And, for the matter of that, my dear
Randall, neither do I. Why aren't you serving your country?"

He started forward in his chair and threw out his arms, and his
dark eyes flashed and a smile of conscious rectitude overspread
his clear-cut features.

"My dear Major--serving my country? Why, I'm working night and day
for it. You don't understand."

"I've already told you I don't."

The boy was my guest. I had not intended to hold a pistol to his
head in one hand and dangle a suit of khaki before his eyes in the
other. I had been ill at ease concerning him for months, but I had
proposed to regain his confidence in a tactful, fatherly way.
Instead of which I found myself regarding him with my beastly
defaulter glare. The blood sometimes flies to one's head.

He condescended to explain.

"There are millions of what the Germans call 'cannon fodder'
about. But there are few intellects--few men, shall I say?--of
genius, scarcely a poet. And men like myself who can express--
that's the whole vital point--who can EXPRESS the higher
philosophy of the Empire, and can point the way to its realisation
are surely more valuable than the yokel or factory hand, who, as
the sum-total of his capabilities, can be trained merely into a
sort of shooting machine. Just look at it, my dear Major, from a
commonsense point of view--" He forgot, the amazing young idiot,
that he was talking not to a maiden aunt, but to a hard-bitten old
soldier. "What good would it serve to stick the comparatively rare
man--I say it in all modesty--the comparatively rare man like
myself in the trenches? It would be foolish waste. I assure you
I'm putting all my talents at the disposal of the country."
Seeing, I suppose, in my eyes, the maintained stoniness of non-
conviction, he went on, "But, pay dear sir, be reasonable." ...
Reasonable! I nearly choked. If I could have stood once more on my
useless legs, I should have swung my left arm round and clouted
him on the side of the head. Reasonable indeed! This well-fed,
able-bodied, young Oxford prig to tell me, an honourable English
officer and gentleman, to be reasonable, when the British Empire,
in peril of its existence, was calling on all its manhood to
defend it in arms! I glared at him. He continued:--

"Yes, be reasonable. Everyone has his place in this World
conflict. We can't all be practical fighters. You wouldn't set
Kitchener or Grey or Lord Crewe to bayonet Germans--"

"By God, sir," I cried, smiting one palm with the fist of the
other hand. "By God, sir, I would, if they were three and twenty."
I had completely lost my temper. "And if I saw them doing nothing,
while the country was asking for MEN, but writing rotten doggerel
and messing about with girls far beneath them in station, I should
call them the damnedest skunks unskinned!"

He had the decency to rise. "Major Meredyth," said he, "you're
under a terrible misapprehension. You're a military man and must
look at everything from a military point of view. It would be
useless to discuss the philosophy of the situation with you. We're
on different planes."

Just what I said.

"You," said I, "seem to be hovering near Tophet and the Abyss."

"No, no," he answered with an indulgent smile. "You are quoting
Carlyle. You must give him up."

"Damned pro-German, I should think I do," I cried. I had forgotten
where my phrase came from.

"I'm glad to hear it. He's a back-number. I'm a modern. I
represent equilibrium--" He made a little rocking gesture with his
graceful hand. "I am out for Eternal Truth, which I think I
perceive."

"In poor little Phyllis Gedge, I suppose?"

"Why not? Look. I am the son, grandson, great-grandson, of English
Tories. She is the daughter of socialism, syndicalism, pacifism,
internationalism--everything that is most apart from my
traditions. But she brings to me beauty, innocence, the feminine
solution of all intellectual concepts. She, the woman, is the soul
of conflicting England. She is torn both ways. But as she has to
breed men, some day, she is instinctively on our side. She is
invaluable to me. She inspires my poems. You may not believe it,
but she is at the back of my political articles. You must really
be a little more broad-minded, Major, and look at these things
from the right point of view. From the point of view of my work,
she is merely a symbol."

"And you?" said I, wrathfully. "What are you to her? Do you
suppose she takes you for a symbol? I wish to Heaven she did. A
round cipher of naught, the symbol of inanity. She takes you for
an honourable gentleman. I've known the child since she was born.
As good a little girl as you could wish to meet."

He drew himself up. "That's the opinion of her I am endeavouring
to express."

"Quite so. You win a good decent girl's affection,--if you
hadn't, she would never have let you walk about with her at
nightfall, with your arm round her waist,--and you have the
cynical audacity to say that she's only a symbol."

"When you asked me to come in this evening," said he, "I naturally
concluded you would broach this subject. I came prepared to give
you a complete explanation of what I am ready to admit was a
compromising situation."

"There is only one explanation," said I angrily. "What are your
intentions regarding the girl?"

He smiled. "Quite honourable."

"You mean marriage?"

"Oh, no," said he, emphatically.

"Then the other thing? That's not honourable."

"Of course not. Certainly not the other thing. I'm not a
blackguard."

"Then what on earth are you playing at?"

He sighed. "I'm afraid you will never understand."

"I'm afraid I won't," said I. "By your own confession you are
neither a lusty blackguard nor an honourable gentleman. You're a
sort of philanderer, somewhere in between. You neither mean to
fight like a man nor love like a man. I'm sorry to say it, but
I've no use for you. As I can't do it myself, will you kindly ring
the bell?"

"Certainly," said he, white with anger, which I was glad to see,
and pressed the electric button beside the mantelpiece. He turned
on me, his head high. There was still some breeding left in him.

"I'm sorry we're at such cross-purposes, Major. All my life long
I've owed you kindnesses I can't ever repay. But at present we're
hopelessly out of sympathy!"

"It seems so," said I. "I had hoped your father's son would be a
better man!"

"My father," said he, "was a successful stockbroker, without any
ideas in his head save the making of money. I don't see what he
has got to do with my well-considered attitude towards life."

"Your callow attitude towards life, my poor boy," said I, "is a
matter of profound indifference to me. But I shall give orders
that you are no longer admitted to this house except in uniform."

"That's absurd," said he.

"Not at all," said I.

In obedience to the summons of the bell Sergeant Marigold appeared
and stood in his ramrod fashion by the door.

Randall came forward to my wheel-chair, with hand outstretched.

"I'm desperately sorry, Major, for this disastrous
misunderstanding."

I thrust my hands beneath the light shawl that covered my legs.

"Don't be such a self-sufficient fool, Randall," I said, "as to
think I don't understand. In the present position there are no
subtleties and no complications. Good-night."

Marigold, with a wooden face, opened wide the door, and Randall,
with a shrug of the shoulders, went out.

I stayed awake the whole of that livelong night.

When I learned the death of young Oswald Fenimore, whom I loved
far more dearly than Randall Holmes, I went to bed and slept
peacefully. A gallant lad died in battle; there is nothing more to
be said, nothing more to be thought. The finality, heroically
sublime, overwhelms the poor workings of the brain. But in the
case of a fellow like Randall Holmes--well, as I have said, I did
not get a wink of sleep the whole night long.

Someone, a few months ago, told me of a young university man--
Oxford or Cambridge, I forget--who, when asked why he was not
fighting, replied; "What has the war to do with me? I disapprove
of this brawling."

Was that the attitude of Randall, whom I had known all his life
long? I shivered, like a fool, all night. The only consolation I
had was to bring commonsense to my aid and to meditate on the
statistical fact that the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge
were practically empty.

But my soul was sick for young Randall Holmes.





CHAPTER IV


On the wedding eve Betty brought the happy young man to dine with
me. He was in that state of unaccustomed and somewhat embarrassed
bliss in which a man would have dined happily with Beelzebub. A
fresh-coloured boy, with fair crisply set hair and a little
moustache a shade or two fairer, he kept on blushing radiantly, as
if apologising in a gallant sort of fashion for his existence in
the sphere of Betty's affection. As I had known him but casually
and desired to make his closer acquaintance, I had asked no one to
meet them, save Betty's aunt, whom a providential cold had
prevented from facing the night air. So, in the comfortable little
oak-panelled dining-room, hung round with my beloved collection of
Delft, I had the pair all to myself, one on each side; and in this
way I was able to read exchanges of glances whence I might form
sage conclusions. Bella, spruce parlour-maid, waited deftly.
Sergeant Marigold, when not occupied in the mild labour of filling
glasses, stood like a guardian ramrod behind my chair--a self-
assigned post to which he stuck grimly like a sentinel. As I
always sat with my back to the fire there must have been times
when, the blaze roaring more fiercely than usual up the chimney,
he must have suffered martyrdom in his hinder parts.

As I talked--for the first time on such intimate footing--with
young Connor, I revised my opinion of him and mentally took back
much that I had said in his disparagement. He was by no means the
dull dog that I had labelled him. By diligent and sympathetic
enquiry I learned that he had been a Natural Science scholar at
Trinity College, Cambridge, where he had taken a first-class
degree--specialising in geology; that by profession (his
father's) he was a mining-engineer, and, in pursuit of his
vocation, had travelled in Galicia, Mexico and Japan; furthermore,
that he had been one of the ardent little band who of recent years
had made the Cambridge Officers Training Corps an effective
school. Hitherto, when I had met him he had sat so agreeably
smiling and modestly mumchance that I had accepted him at his face
value.

I was amused to see how Betty, in order to bring confusion on me,
led him to proclaim himself. And I loved the manner in which he
did so. To hear him, one would have thought that he owed
everything in the world to Betty--from his entrance scholarship at
the University to the word of special commendation which his
company had received from the General of his Division at last
week's inspection. Yes, he was the modest, clean-bred, simple
English gentleman who, without self-consciousness or self-seeking,
does his daily task as well as it can be done, just because it is
the thing that is set before him to do. And he was over head and
ears in love with Betty.

I took it upon myself to dismiss her with a nod after she had
smoked a cigarette over her coffee. Mrs. Marigold, as a soldier's
wife, I announced, had a world of invaluable advice to give her.
Willie Connor opened the door. On the threshold she said very
prettily:

"Don't drink too much of Major Meredyth's old port. It has been
known before now to separate husbands and wives for years and
years."

He looked after her for a few seconds before he closed the door.

Oh, my God! I've looked like that, in my time, after one dear
woman.... Humanity is very simple, after all. Every generation
does exactly the same beautiful, foolish things as its forerunner.
As he approached the table, I said with a smile:--

"You're only copying your great-great-grandfather."

"In what way, sir?" he asked, resuming his place.

I pushed the decanter of port. "He watched the disappearing skirt
of your great-great-grandmother."

"She was doubtless a very venerable old lady," said he, flushing
and helping himself to wine. "I never knew her, but she wasn't a
patch on Betty!"

"But," said I, "when your great-great-grandfather opened the door
for her to pass out, she wasn't venerable at all, but gloriously
young."

"I suppose he was satisfied, poor old chap." He took a sip. "But
those days did not produce Betty Fairfaxes." He laughed. "I'm
jolly sorry for my ancestors."

Well--that is the way I like to hear a young man talk. It was the
modern expression of the perfect gentle knight. In so far as went
his heart's intention and his soul's strength to assure it, I had
no fear for Betty's happiness. He gave it to her fully into her
own hands; whether she would throw it away or otherwise misuse it
was another matter.

Though I have ever loved women, en tout bien et tout honneur,
their ways have never ceased from causing me mystification. I
think I can size up a man, especially given such an opportunity as
I had in the case of Willie Connor--I have been more or less
trained in the business all my man's life; but Betty Fairfax, whom
I had known intimately for as many years as she could remember,
puzzled me exceedingly. I defy anyone to have picked a single
fault in her demeanour towards her husband of to-morrow. She lit a
cigarette for him in the most charming way in the world, and when
he guided the hand that held the match, she touched his crisp hair
lightly with the fingers of the other. She was all smiles. When we
met in the drawing-room, she retailed with a spice of mischief
much of Mrs. Marigold's advice. She had seated herself on the
music stool. Swinging round, she quoted:

"'Even the best husband,' she said, 'will go on swelling himself
up with vanity just because he's a man. A sensible woman, Miss,
lets him go on priding of himself, poor creature. It sort of helps
his dignity when the time comes for him to eat out of your hand,
and makes him think he's doing you a favour.'"

"When are you going to eat out of my hand, Willie?" she asked.

"Haven't I been doing it for the past week?"

"Oh, they always do that before they're married--so Mrs. Marigold
informed me. I mean afterwards."

"Don't you think, my dear," I interposed, "it depends on what your
hands hold out for him to eat?"

Her eyes wavered a bit under mine.

"If he's good," she answered, "they'll be always full of nice
things."

She sat, flushed, happy, triumphant, her arms straight down, her
knuckles resting on the leathern seat, her silver-brocaded,
slender feet, clear of the floor, peeping close together beneath
her white frock.

"And if he isn't good?"

"They'll be full of nasty medicine."

She laughed and pivoted round and, after running over the keys of
the piano for a second or two, began to play Gounod's "Death March
of a Marionette." She played it remarkably well. When she had
ended, Connor walked from the hearth, where he had been standing,
to her side. I noticed a little puzzled look in his eyes.

"Delightful," said he. "But, Betty, what put that thing suddenly
into your head?"

"We had been talking nonsense," she replied, picking out a chord
or two, without looking al him. "And I thought we ought to give
all past vanities and frivolities and lunacies a decent burial."

He put both hands very tenderly on her shoulders.

"Requiescat," said he.

She spread out her fingers and struck the two resonant chords of
an "Amen," and then glanced up at him, laughing.

After a while, Marigold announced her car, or, rather, her aunt's
car. They took their leave. I gave them my benediction. Presently,
Betty, fur-coated, came running in alone. She flung herself down,
in her impetuous way, beside my wheel-chair. No visit of Betty's
would have been complete without this performance.

"I haven't had a word with you all the evening, Majy, dear. I've
told Willie to discuss strategy with Sergeant Marigold in the
hall, till I come. Well--you thought I was a damn little fool the
other day, didn't you? What do you think now?"

"I think, my dear," said I, with a hand on her forehead, "that you
are marrying a very gallant English gentleman of whose love any
woman in the land might be proud."

She clutched me round the neck and brought her young face near
mine--and looked at me--I hesitate to say it,--but so it seemed,--
somewhat haggardly.

"I love to hear you say that, it means so much to me. Don't think
I haven't a sense of proportion. I have. In all this universal
slaughter and massacre, a woman's life counts as much as that of a
mosquito." She freed an arm and snapped her fingers. "But to the
woman herself, her own life can't help being of some value. Such
as it is, I want to give it all, every bit of it, to Willie. He
shall have everything, everything, everything that I can give
him."

I looked into the young, drawn, pleading face long and earnestly.
No longer was I mystified. I remembered her talk with me a couple
of days before, and I read her riddle.

She had struck gold. She knew it. Gold of a man's love. Gold of a
man's strength. Gold of a man's honour. Gold of a man's stainless
past. Gold of a man's radiant future. And though she wore the
mocking face and talked the mocking words of the woman who
expected such a man to "eat out of her hand," she knew that never
out of her hand would he eat save that which she should give him
in honourable and wifely service. She knew that. She was
exquisitely anxious that I should know it too. Floodgates of
relief were expressed when she saw that I knew it. Not that I,
personally, counted a scrap. What she craved was a decent human
soul's justification of her doings. She craved recognition of her
action in casting away base metal forever and taking the pure gold
to her heart.

"Tell me that I am doing the right thing, dear," she said, "and
to-morrow I'll be the happiest woman in the world."

And I told her, in the most fervent manner in my power.

"You quite understand?" she said, standing up, looking very young
and princess-like, her white throat gleaming between her furs and
up-turned chin.

"You will find, my dear," said I, "that the significance of your
Dead March of a Marionette will increase every day of your married
life."

She stiffened in a sudden stroke of passion, looking, for the
instant, electrically beautiful.

"I wish," she cried, "someone had written the Dead March of a
Devil."

She bent down, kissed me, and went out in a whirr of furs and
draperies.

Of course, all I could do was to scratch my thin iron-grey hair
and light a cigar and meditate in front of the fire. I knew all
about it--or at any rate I thought I did, which, as far as my
meditation in front of the fire is concerned, comes to the same
thing.

Betty had cast out the base metal of her love for Loenard Boyce in
order to accept the pure gold of the love of Willie Connor. So she
thought, poor girl. She had been in love with Boyce. She had been
engaged to Boyce. Boyce, for some reason or the other, had turned
her down. Spretae injuria formae--she had cast Boyce aside. But
for all her splendid surrender of her womanhood to Willie Connor,
for the sake of her country, she still loved Leonard Boyce. Or, if
she wasn't in love with him, she couldn't get him out of her head
or her senses. Something like that, anyhow. I don't pretend to
know exactly what goes on in the soul or nature, or whatever it
is, of a young girl, who has given her heart to a man. I can only
use the crude old phrase: she was still in love (in some sort of
fashion) with Leonard Boyce, and she was going to marry, for the
highest motives, somebody else.

"Confound the fellow," said I, with an irritable gesture and
covered myself with cigar ash.

She had called Boyce a devil and implied a wish that he were dead.
For myself I did not know what to make of him, for reasons which I
will state. I never approved of the engagement. As a matter of
fact, I knew--and was one of the very few who knew--of a black
mark against him--the very blackest mark that could be put against
a soldier's name. It was a puzzling business. And when I say I
knew of the mark, I must be candid and confess that its awful
justification lies in the conscience of one man living in the
world to-day--if indeed he be still alive.

Boyce was a great bronzed, bull-necked man, with an overpowering
personality. People called him the very model of a soldier. He was
always admired and feared by his men. His fierce eye and deep,
resonant voice, and a suggestion of hidden strength, even of
brutality, commanded implicit obedience. But both glance and voice
would soften caressingly and his manner convey a charm which made
him popular with men--brother officers and private soldiers alike
--and with women. With regard to the latter--to put things crudely
--they saw in him the essential, elemental male. Of that I am
convinced. It was the open secret of his many successes. And he
had a buoyant, boyish, disarming, chivalrous way with him. If he
desired a woman's lips he would always begin by kissing the hem of
her skirt.

Had I not known what I did, I, an easy-going sort of Christian
temperamentally inclined to see the best in my fellow-creatures,
and, as I boastingly said a little while ago, a trained judge of
men, should doubtless have fallen, like most other people, under
the spell of his fascination. But whenever I met him, I used to
look at him and say to myself: "What's at the back of you anyway?
What about that business at Vilboek's Farm?"

Now this is what I knew--with the reservation I have made above--
and to this day he is not aware of my knowledge.

It was towards the end of the Boer War. Boyce had come out rather
late; for which, of course, he was not responsible. A soldier has
to go when he is told. After a period of humdrum service he was
sent off with a section of mounted infantry to round up a certain
farm-house suspected of harbouring Boer combatants. The excursion
was a mere matter of routine--of humdrum commonplace. As usual it
was made at night, but this was a night of full dazzling moon. The
farm lay in a hollow of the veldt, first seen from the crest of a
kopje. There it lay below, ramshackle and desolate, a rough wall
around; flanked by outbuildings--barn and cowsheds. The section
rode down. The stoep led to a shuttered front. There was no sign
of life. The moonlight blazed full on it. They dismounted,
tethered their horses behind the wall, and entered the yard. The
place was deserted, derelict--not even a cat.

Suddenly a shot rang out from somewhere in the main building, and
the Sergeant, the next man to Boyce, fell dead, shot through the
brain. The men looked at Boyce for command and saw a hulking idiot
paralysed by fear.

"His mouth hung open and his eyes were like a silly servant girl's
looking at a ghost." So said my informant.

Two more shots and two men fell. Boyce still stood white and
gasping, unable to move a muscle or utter a sound. His face looked
ghastly in the moonlight. A shot pierced his helmet, and the shock
caused him to stagger and lose his legs. A corporal rushed up,
thinking he was hit, and, finding him whole, rose, in order to
leave him there, and, in rising, got a bullet through the neck.
Thus there were four men killed, and the Commanding Officer, of
his own accord, put out of action. It all happened in a few
confused moments. Then the remaining men did what Boyce should
have commanded as soon as the first shot was fired--they rushed
the house.

It contained one solitary inmate, an old man with a couple of
Mauser rifles, whom they had to shoot in self-defence.

Meanwhile Boyce, white and haggard-eyed, had picked himself up;
revolver in hand he stood on the stoep. His men came out, cursed
him to his face while giving him their contemptuous reports
brought the dead bodies of their comrades into the house and laid
them out decently, together with the body of the white-bearded
Boer. After that they mounted their horses without a word to him
and rode off. And he let them ride; for his authority was gone;
and he knew that they justly laid the deaths of their comrades at
the door of his cowardice.

What he did during the next few awful hours is known only to God
and to Boyce himself. The four dead men, his companions, have told
no tales. But at last, one of his men--Somers was his name--came
riding back at break-neck speed. When he had left the moon rode
high in the heavens; when he returned it was dawn--and he had a
bloody tunic and the face of a man who had escaped from hell. He
threw himself from his horse and found Boyce, sitting on the stoep
with his head in his hands. He shook him by the shoulder. Boyce
started to his feet. At first he did not recognise Somers. Then he
did and read black tidings in the man's eyes.

"What's the matter?"

"They're all wiped out, sir. The whole blooming lot."

He told a tale of heroic disaster. The remnant of the section had
ridden off in hot indignation and had missed their way. They had
gone in a direction opposite to safety, and after a couple of
hours had fallen in with a straggling portion of a Boer Commando.
Refusing to surrender, they had all been killed save Somers, who,
with a bullet through his shoulder, had prudently turned bridle
and fled hell for leather.

Boyce put his hands up to his head and walked about the yard for a
few moments. Then he turned abruptly and stood toweringly over the
scared survivor--a tough, wizened little Cockney of five foot six.

"Well, what's going to happen now?" he asked, in his soft,
dangerous voice.

Somers replied, "I must leave that to you, sir."

Boyce regarded him glitteringly for a long time. A scheme of
salvation was taking vivid shape in his mind....

"My report of this occurrence will be that as soon as, say, three
men dropped here, the rest of the troop got into a panic and made
a bolt of it. Say the Sergeant and myself remained. We broke into
the house and did for the old Boer, who, however, unfortunately
did for the Sergeant. Then I alone went out in search of my men
and following their track found they had gone in a wrong
direction, and eventually scented danger, which was confirmed by
my meeting you, with your bloody tunic and your bloody tale."

"But good God! sir," cried the man, "You'd be having me shot for
running away. I could tell a damned different story, Captain
Boyce."

"Who would believe you?"

The Cockney intelligence immediately appreciated the situation. It
also was ready for the alternative it guessed at the back of
Boyce's mind.

"I know it's a mess, sir," he replied, with a straight look at
Boyce. "A mess for both of us, and, as I have said, I'll leave it
to you, sir."

"Very well," said Boyce. "It's the simplest thing in the world.
There were four killed at once, including Sergeant Oldham. You
remained faithful when the others bolted. You and I tackled the
old Boer and you got wounded. You and I went on trek for the rest
of the troop. We got within breathing distance of the Commando--
how many strong?"

"About a couple of hundred, sir."

"And of course we bolted back without knowing anything about the
troop, except that we are sure that, dead or alive, the Boers have
accounted for them. If you'll agree to this report, we can ride
back to Headquarters and I think I can promise you sergeant's
stripes in a very short time!"

"I agree to the report, sir," said Somers, "because I don't see
that I can do anything else. But to hell with the stripes under
false pretences and don't you try playing that sort of thing off
on me."

"As you like," replied Boyce, unruffled. "Provided we understand
each other on the main point."

So they left the farm and rode to Headquarters and Boyce made his
report, and as all save one of his troop were dead, there were
none, save that one, to gainsay him. On his story no doubt was
cast; but an officer who loses his whole troop in the military
operation of storming a farm-house garrisoned by one old man does
not find peculiar favour in the eyes of his Colonel. Boyce took a
speedy opportunity of transference, and got into the thick of some
fighting. Then he served with distinction and actually got
mentioned in dispatches for pluckily rescuing a wounded man under
fire.

For a long time Somers kept his mouth shut; but at last he began
to talk. The ugly rumour spread. It even reached my battery which
was a hundred miles away; for Johnny Dacre, one of my subs, had a
brother in Boyce's old regiment. For my own part I scouted the
story as soon as I heard it, and I withered up young Dacre for
daring to bring such abominable slander within my Rhadamanthine
sphere. I dismissed the calumny from my mind. Providentially, (as
I heard later), the news came of Boyce's "mention," and Somers was
set down as a liar. The poor devil was had up before the Colonel
and being an imaginative and nervous man denied the truth of the
rumour and by dexterous wriggling managed to exculpate himself
from the charge of being its originator.

I must, parenthetically, crave indulgence for these apparently
irrelevant details. But as, in this chronicle, I am mainly
concerned with the career of Leonard Boyce, I have no option but
to give them. They are necessary for a conception of the character
of a remarkable man to whom I have every reason and every
honourable desire to render justice. It is necessary, too, that I
should state clearly the manner in which I happened to learn the
facts of the affair at Vilboek's Farm, for I should not like you
to think that I have given a credulous ear to idle slander.

It was in Cape Town, whither I had been despatched, on a false
alarm of enteric. I was walking with Johnny Dacre up Adderley
Street, dun with kahki, when he met his brother Reginald, who was
promptly introduced to Johnny's second in command. Reggie was off
to hospital to see one of his men who had been badly hurt.

"It's the chap," he said to his brother, "who was with Boyce
through that shady affair at Vilboek's Farm."

"I don't know why you call it a shady affair," said I, somewhat
acidly. "I know Captain Boyce--he is a near neighbour of mine at
home--and he has proved himself to be a gallant officer and a
brave man."

The young fellow reddened. "I'm awfully sorry, sir. I withdraw the
word 'shady.' But this poor chap has something on his mind, and
everyone has a down on him. He led a dog's life till he was
knocked out, and he has been leading a worse one since. I don't
call it fair." He looked at me squarely out of his young blue
eyes--the lucky devil, he is commanding his regiment now in
Flanders, with the D.S.O. ribbon on his tunic. "Will you come with
me and see him, sir?"

"Certainly," said I, for I had nothing to do, and the boy's
earnestness impressed me.

On our way he told me of such mixture of rumour and fact as he was
acquainted with. It was then that I heard the man Somers's name
for the first time. We entered the hospital, sat by the side of
the man's bed, and he told us the story of Vilboek's Farm which I
have, in bald terms, just related. Shortly afterwards I returned
to the front, where the famous shell knocked me out of the Army
forever.

What has happened to Somers I don't know. He was, I learned, soon
afterwards discharged from the Army. He either died or disappeared
in the full current of English life. Perhaps he is with our armies
now. It does not matter. What matters is my memory of his nervous,
sallow, Cockney face, its earnestness, its imprint of veracity,
and the damning lucidity of his narrative.

I exacted from my young friends a promise to keep the unsavoury
tale to themselves. No good would arise from a publicity which
would stain the honour of the army. Besides, Boyce had made good.
They have kept their promise like honest gentlemen. I have never,
personally, heard further reference to the affair, and of course I
have never mentioned it to anyone.

Now, it is right for me to mention that, for many years, I lived
in a horrible state of dubiety with regard to Boyce. There is no
doubt that, after the Vilboek business, he acted in an exemplary
manner; there is no doubt that he performed the gallant deed for
which he got his mention. But what about Somers's story? I tried
to disbelieve it as incredible. That an English officer--not a
nervous wisp of a man like Somers, but a great, hulking, bull-
necked gladiator--should have been paralysed with fear by one shot
coming out of a Boer farm, and thereby demoralised and
incapacitated from taking command of a handful of men; that,
instead of blowing his brains out, he should have imposed his
Mephistophelian compact upon the unhappy Somers and carried off
the knavish business successfully--I could not believe it. On the
other hand, there was the British private. I have known him all my
life, God bless him! Thank God, it is my privilege to know him
now, as he lies knocked to bits, cheerily, in our hospital. It was
inconceivable that out of sheer funk he could abandon a popular
officer. And his was not even a scratch crowd, but a hard-bitten
regiment with all sorts of glorious names embroidered on its
colours....

I hope you see my difficulty in regard to my Betty's love affairs.
I had nothing against Boyce, save this ghastly story, which might
or might not be true. Officially, he had made an unholy mess of
such a simple military operation as rounding up a Boer farm, and
the prize of one dead old Boer had covered him with ridicule; but
officially, also, he had retrieved his position by distinguished
service. After all, it was not his fault that his men had run
away. On the other hand...well, you cannot but appreciate the
vicious circle of my thoughts, when Betty, in her frank way, came
and told me of her engagement to him. What could I say? It would
have been damnable of me to hint at scandal of years gone by. I
received them both and gave them my paralytic blessing, and
Leonard Boyce accepted it with the air of a man who might have
been blessed, without a qualm of conscience, by the Third Person
of the Trinity in Person.

This was in April, 1914. He had retired from the Army some years
before with the rank of Major, and lived with his mother--he was a
man of means--in Wellingsford. In the June of that year he went
off salmon fishing in Norway. On the outbreak of war he returned
to England and luckily got his job at once. He did not come back
to Wellingsford. His mother went to London and stayed there until
he was ordered out to the front. I had not seen him since that
June. And, as far as I am aware, my dear Betty had not seen him
either.

Marigold entered.

"Well?" said I.

"I thought you rang, sir."

"You didn't," I said. "You thought I ought to have rung, But you
were mistaken."

I have on my mantelpiece a tiny, corroded, wooden Egyptian bust,
of so little value that Mr. Hatoun of Cairo (and every visitor to
Cairo knows Hatoun) gave it me as Baksheesh; it is, however, a
genuine bit from a poor humble devil's tomb of about five thousand
years ago. And it has only one positive eye and no expression.

Marigold was the living replica of it--with his absurd wig.

"In a quarter of an hour," said I, "I shall have rung."

"Very good, sir," said Marigold.

But he had disturbed the harmonical progression of my reflections.
They all went anyhow. When he returned, all I could say was:

"It's Miss Betty's wedding to-morrow. I suppose I've got a morning
coat and a top hat."

"You have a morning coat, sir," said Marigold. "But your last silk
hat you gave to Miss Althea, sir, to make a work-bag out of the
outside."

"So I did," said I.

It was an unpleasant reminiscence. A hat is about as symbolical a
garment as you may be pleased to imagine. I wanted to wear at the
live Betty's wedding the ceremonious thing which I had given, for
purposes of vanity, to the dead Althea. I was cross with Marigold.

"Why did you let me do such a silly thing? You might have known
that I should want it some day or other. Why didn't you foresee
such a contingency?"

"Why," asked Marigold woodenly, "didn't you or I, sir, or many
wiser than us, foresee the war?"

"Because we were all damned fools," said I.

Marigold approached my chair with his great inexorable tentacles
of arms. It was bed time.

"I'm sorry about the hat, sir," said he.





CHAPTER V


In due course Captain Connor's regiment went off to France; not
with drums beating and colours flying--I wish to Heaven it had; if
there had been more pomp and circumstance in England, the popular
imagination would not have remained untouched for so long a time--
but in the cold silent hours of the night, like a gang of
marauders. Betty did not go to bed after he had left, but sat by
the fire till morning. Then she dressed in uniform and resumed her
duties at the hospital. Many a soldier's bride was doing much the
same. And her days went on just as they did before her marriage.
She presented a smiling face to the world; she said:

"If I'm as happy as can be expected in the circumstances, I think
it my duty to look happier."

It was a valiant philosophy.

The falling of a chimney-stack brought me up against Daniel Gedge,
who before the war did all my little repairs. The chimney I put
into the hands of Day & Higgins, another firm of builders.

A day or two afterwards Hosea shied at something and I discovered
it was Gedge, who had advanced into the roadway expressing a
desire to have a word with me. I quieted the patriotic Hosea and
drew up by the kerb. Gedge was a lean foxy-faced man with a long,
reddish nose and a long blunt chin from which a grizzled beard
sprouted aggressively forwards. He had hard, stupid grey eyes.

"I hope you 'll excuse the liberty I take in stopping you, sir,"
he said, civilly.

"That's all right," said I. "What's the matter?"

"I thought I had given you satisfaction these last twenty years."

I assented. "Quite correct," said I.

"Then, may I ask, sir, without offence, why you've called in Day &
Higgins?"

"You may," said I, "and, with or without offence, I'll answer your
question. I've called them in because they're good loyal people.
Higgins has joined the army, and so has Day's eldest boy, while
you have been going on like a confounded pro-German."

"You've no right to say that, Major Meredyth."

"Not when you go over to Godbury"--the surging metropolis of the
County some fifteen miles off--"and tell a pack of fools to strike
because this is a capitalists' war? Not when you go round the
mills here, and do your best to stop young fellows from fighting
for their country? God bless my soul, in whose interests are you
acting, if not Germany's?"

He put on his best platform manner. "I'm acting in the best
interests of the people of this country. The war is wrong and
incredibly foolish and can bring no advantage to the working man.
Why should he go and be killed or maimed for life? Will it put an
extra penny in his pocket or his widow's? No. Oh!"--he checked my
retort--"I know everything you would say. I see the arguments
every day in all your great newspapers. But the fact remains that
I don't see eye to eye with you, or those you represent. You think
one way, I think another. We agree to differ."

"We don't," said I. "I don't agree at all."

"At any rate," he said, "I can't see how a difference of political
opinion can affect my ability now to put a new chimney-stack in
your house, any more than it has done in the past."

"In the past," said I, "political differences were parochial
squabbles in comparison with things nowadays. You're either for
England, or against her."

He smiled wryly. "I'm for England. We both are. You think her
salvation lies one way. I think another. This is a free country in
which every man has a right to his own opinion."

"Exactly so," said I. "Therefore you'll admit that I've a right to
the opinion that you ought to be locked up either in a gaol or a
lunatic asylum as a danger to the state, and that, having that
rightful opinion, I'm justified in not entrusting the safety of my
house to one who, in my aforesaid opinion, is either a criminal or
a lunatic."

Dialectically, I had him there. It afforded me keen enjoyment.
Besides being a John Bull Englishman, I am a cripple and therefore
ever so little malicious.

"It's all very well for you to talk, Major Meredyth," said he,
"but your opinions cost you nothing--mine are costing me my
livelihood. It isn't fair."

"You might as well say," I replied, "that I, who have never dared
to steal anything in my life, live in ease and comfort, whereas
poor Bill Sykes, who has devoted all his days to burglary, has
seven years' penal servitude. No, Gedge," said I, gathering up the
reins, "it can't be done. You can't have it both ways."

He put a detaining hand on Hosea's bridle and an evil flash came
into his hard grey eyes.

"I'll have it some other way, then," he said. "A way you've no
idea of. A way that'll knock all you great people of Wellingsford
off your high horses. If you drive me to it, you'll see. I'll bide
my time and I don't care whether it breaks me."

He stamped his foot and tugged at the bridle. Two or three
passers-by halted wonderingly and Prettilove, the hairdresser,
moved across the pavement from his shop door where he had been
taking the air.

"My good fellow," said I, "you have lost your temper and are
talking drivel. Kindly unhand my donkey."

Prettilove, who has a sycophantic sense of humour, burst into a
loud guffaw. Gedge swung angrily away, and Hosea and I continued
our interrupted progress down the High Street. Although I had
called his dark menaces drivel, I could not help wondering what it
meant. Was he going to guide a German Army to Wellingsford? Was
he, a modern Guy Fawkes, plotting to blow up the Town Hall while
Mayor and Corporation sat in council? He was not the man to utter
purely idle threats. What the dickens was he going to do?
Something mean and dirty and underhand. I knew his ways, He was
always getting the better of somebody. The wise never let him put
in a pane of glass without a specification and estimate, and if he
had not been by far the most competent builder in the town--
perhaps the only one who thoroughly knew his business in all its
branches--no one would have employed him.

When I next saw Betty, it was in one of the corridors of the
hospital, after a committee meeting; she stopped by my chair to
pass the time of day. Through the open doorway of a ward I
perceived a well-known figure in nurse's uniform.

"Why," said I, "there's Phyllis Gedge."

Betty nodded. "She has just come in as a probationer."

"I thought her father wouldn't let her. I've heard--Heaven knows
whether it's true, but it sounds likely--that he said if men were
such fools as to get shot he didn't see why his daughter should
help to mend them."

"He has consented now," said Betty, "and Phyllis is delighted."

"No doubt it's a bid for popular favour," said I. And I told her
of his dwindling business and of my encounter with him. When I
came to his threat Betty's brows darkened.

"I don't like that at all," she said.

"Why? What do you think he means?"

"Mischief." She lowered her voice, for, it being visiting day at
the hospital, people were passing up and down the corridor.
"Suppose he has some of the people here in his power?"

"Blackmail--?" I glanced up at her sharply. "What do you know
about it?"

"Nothing," she replied abruptly. Then she looked down and fingered
her wedding-ring. "I only said 'suppose.'"

A Sister appeared at the door of the ward and seeing us together
paused hoveringly.

"I rather think you're wanted," said I.

I left the hospital somewhat disturbed in mind. Summons to duty
had cut our conversation short; but I knew that no matter how long
I had cross-questioned Betty I should have got nothing further
out of her. She was a remarkably outspoken young woman. What she
said she meant, and what she didn't want to say all the cripples
in the British Army could not have dragged out of her.

I tried her again a few days later. A slight cold, aided and
abetted by a dear exaggerating idiot of a tyrannical doctor,
confined me to the house and she came flying in, expecting to find
me in extremis. When she saw me clothed and in my right mind and
smoking a big cigar, she called me a fraud.

"Look here," said I, after a while. "About Gedge--" again her brow
darkened and her lips set stiffly--"do you think he has his knife
into young Randall Holmes?"

I had worried about the boy. Naturally, if Gedge found the
relations between his daughter and Randall unsatisfactory, no one
could blame him for any outbreak of parental indignation. But he
ought to break out openly, while there was yet time--before any
harm was done--not nurse some diabolical scheme of subterraneous
vengeance. Betty's brow cleared, and she laughed. I saw at once
that I was on a wrong track.

"Why should he have his knife into Randall? I suppose you've got
Phyllis in your mind."

"I have. How did you guess?"

She laughed again.

"What other reason could he have? But how did you come to hear of
Randall and Phyllis?"

"Never mind," said I, "I did. And if Gedge is angry, I can to some
extent sympathize with him."

"But he's not. Not the least little bit in the world," she
declared, lighting a cigarette. "Gedge and Randall are as thick as
thieves, and Phyllis won't have anything to do with either of
them."

"Now, my dear," said I. "Now that you're married, become a real
womanly woman and fill my empty soul with gossip."

"There's no gossip at all about it," she replied serenely. "It's
all sordid and romantic fact. The two men hold long discussions
together at Gedge's house, Gedge talking anti-patriotism and
Randall talking rot which he calls philosophy. You can hear them,
can't you? Their meeting-ground is the absurdity of Randall
joining the army."

"And Phyllis?"

"She is a loyal little soul and as miserable as can be. She's
deplorably in love with Randall. She has told me so. And because
she's in love with a man whom she knows to be a slacker she's
eaten up with shame. Now she won't speak to him To avoid meeting
him she lives entirely at the hospital--a paying probationer."

"That must be since the last Committee Meeting," I said.

'Yes."

"And Daniel Gedge pays a guinea a week?"

"He doesn't," said Betty. "I do."

I accepted the information with a motion of the head. She went on
after a minute or so. "I have always been fond of the child"--
there were only three or four years difference between them!--
"and so I want to protect her. The time may come when she'll need
protection. She has told me things--not now--but long ago--which
frightened her. She came to me for advice. Since then I've kept an
eye on her--as far as I could. Her coming into the hospital helps
me considerably."

"When you say 'things which frightened her,' do you mean in
connection with her father?"

Again the dark look in Betty's eyes.

"Yes," she said. "He's an evil, dangerous man."

That was all I could get out of her. If she had meant me to know
the character of Gedge's turpitude, she would have told me of her
own accord. But in our talk at the hospital she had hinted at
blackmail--and blackmailers are evil, dangerous men.

I went to see Sir Anthony about it. Beyond calling him a damned
scoundrel, a term which he applied to all pro-Germans, pacifists
and half the Cabinet, he did not concern himself about Gedge.
Young Randall Holmes's intimacy with the scoundrel seemed to him a
matter of far greater importance. He strode up and down his
library, choleric and gesticulating.

"A gentleman and a scholar to hob-nob with a traitorous beast like
that! I know that he writes for a filthy weekly paper. Somebody
sent me a copy a few days ago. It's rot--but not actually
poisonous like that he must hear from Gedge. That's the reason, I
suppose, he's not in the King's uniform. I've had my eye on him
for some time. That's why I've not asked him to the house."

I told Sir Anthony of my interview with the young man. He waxed
wroth. In a country with a backbone every Randall Holmes in the
land would have been chucked willy-nilly into the army. But the
country had spinal disorders. It had locomotor ataxy. The result
of sloth and self-indulgence. We had the Government we deserved
... I need not quote further. You can imagine a fine old fox-
hunting Tory gentleman, with England filling all the spaces of his
soul, blowing off the steam of his indignation.

When he had ended, "What," said I, "is to be done?"

"I'll lay my horsewhip across the young beggar's shoulders the
next time I meet him."

"Capital," said I. "If I were you I should never ride abroad
except in my mayor's gown and chain, so that you can give an
official character to the thrashing."

He glanced swiftly at me in his bird-like fashion, his brow
creased into a thousand tiny horizontal lines--it always took him
a fraction of a second to get clear of the literal significance of
words--and then he laughed. Personal violence was out of the
question. Why, the young beggar might summon him for assault. No;
he had a better idea. He would put in a word at the proper
quarter, so that every recruiting sergeant in the district should
have orders to stop him at every opportunity.

"I shouldn't do that," said I.

"Then, I don't know what the deuce I can do," said Sir Anthony.

As I didn't know, either, our colloquy was fruitless. Eventually
Sir Anthony said:

"Perhaps it's likely, after all, that Gedge may offend young
Oxford's fastidiousness. It can't be long before he discovers
Gedge to be nothing but a vulgar, blatant wind-bag; and then he
may undergo some reaction."

I agreed. It seemed to be the most sensible thing he had said.
Give Gedge enough rope and he would hang himself. So we parted.

I have said before that when I want to shew how independent I am
of everybody I drive abroad in my donkey carriage. But there are
times when I have to be dependent on Marigold for carrying me into
the houses I enter; on these helpless occasions I am driven about
by Marigold in a little two-seater car. That is how I visited
Wellings Park and that is how I set off a day or two later to call
on Mrs. Boyce.

As she took little interest in anything foreign to her own inside,
she was not to most people an exhilarating companion. She even
discussed the war in terms of her digestion. But we were old
friends. Being a bit of a practical philosopher I could always
derive some entertainment from her serial romance of a Gastric
Juice, and besides, she was the only person in Wellingsford whom I
did not shrink from boring with the song of my own ailments.
Rather than worry the Fenimores or Betty or Mrs. Holmes with my
aches and pains I would have hung on, like the idiot boy of Sparta
with the fox, until my vitals were gnawed out--parenthetically, it
has always worried me to conjecture why a boy should steal a fox,
why it should have been so valuable to the owner, and to what use
he put it. In the case of all my other friends I regarded myself
as too much of an obvious nuisance, as it was, for me to work on
their sympathy for infirmities that I could hide; but with Mrs.
Boyce it was different. The more I chanted antistrophe to her
strophe of lamentation the more was I welcome in her drawing-room.
I had not seen her for some weeks. Perhaps I had been feeling
remarkably well with nothing in the world to complain about, and
therefore unequipped with a topic of conversation. However, hearty
or not, it was time for me to pay her a visit. So I ordered the
car.

Mrs. Boyce lived in a comfortable old house half a mile or so
beyond the other end of the town, standing in half a dozen well-
wooded acres. It was a fair April afternoon, all pale sunshine and
tenderness. A dream of fairy green and delicate pink and shy blue
sky melting into pearl. The air smelt sweet. It was good to be in
it, among the trees and the flowers and the birds.

Others must have also felt the calls of the spring, for as we were
driving up to the house, I caught a glimpse of the lawn and of two
figures strolling in affectionate attitude. One was that of Mrs.
Boyce; the other, khaki-clad and towering above her, had his arm
round her waist. The car pulled up at the front door. Before we
had time to ring, a trim parlour-maid appeared.

"Mrs. Boyce is not at home, sir."

Marigold, who, when my convenience was in question, swept away
social conventions like cobwebs, fixed her with his one eye, and
before I could interfere, said:

"I'm afraid you're mistaken. I've just seen Major Boyce and Madam
on the lawn."

The maid reddened and looked at me appealingly.

"My orders were to say not at home, sir."

"I quite understand, Mary," said I. "Major Boyce is home on short
leave, and they don't want to be disturbed. Isn't that it?"

"Yes, sir."

"Marigold," said I. "Right about turn."

Marigold, who had stopped the car, got out unwillingly and went to
the starting-handle. That I should be refused admittance to a
house which I had deigned to honour with my presence he regarded
as an intolerable insult. He also loved to have tea, as a pampered
guest, in other folks' houses. When he got home Mrs. Marigold, as
like as not, would give him plain slabs of bread buttered by her
economical self. I knew my Marigold. He gave a vicious and
ineffectual turn or two and then stuck his head in the bonnet.

The situation was saved by the appearance from the garden of Mrs.
Boyce herself, a handsome, erect, elegantly dressed old lady in
the late sixties, pink and white like a Dresden figure and in her
usual condition of resplendent health. She held out her hand.

"I couldn't let you go without telling you that Leonard is back. I
don't want the whole town to know. If it did, I should see nothing
of him, his leave is so short. That's why I told Mary to say 'not
at home.' But an old friend like you--Would you like to see him?"

Marigold closed the bonnet and stood up with a grimace which
passed for a happy smile.

"I should, of course," said I, politely. "But I quite understand.
You have everything to say to each other. No. I won't stay"
--Marigold's smile faded into woodenness--"I only turned in idly to
see how you were getting on. But just tell me. How is Leonard?
Fit, I hope?"

"He's wonderful," she said.

I motioned Marigold to start the car.

"Give him my kind regards," said I. "No, indeed. He doesn't want
to see an old crock like me." The engine rattled. "I hope he's
pleased at finding his mother looking so bonny."

"It's only excitement at having Leonard," she explained earnestly.
"In reality I'm far from well. But I wouldn't tell him for
worlds."

"What's that you wouldn't tell, mother?" cried a soft, cheery
voice, and Leonard, the fine flower of English soldiery, turned
the corner of the house.

There he stood, tall, deep-chested, clear-eyed, bronzed, his heavy
chin in the air, his bull-neck not detracting from his physical
handsomeness, but giving it a seal of enormous strength.

"My dear fellow," he cried, grasping my hand heartily, "how glad I
am to see you. Come along in and let mother give you some tea.
Nonsense!" he waved away my protest. "Marigold, stop that engine
and bring in the Major. I've got lots of things to tell you.
That's right."

He strode boyishly to the front door, which he threw open wide to
admit Marigold and myself and followed us with Mrs. Boyce into the
drawing-room, talking all the while. I must confess that I was
just a little puzzled by his exuberant welcome. And, to judge by
the blank expression that flitted momentarily over her face, so
was his mother. If he were so delighted by my visit, why had he
not crossed the lawn at once as soon as he saw the car? Why had he
sent his mother on ahead? I was haunted by an exchange of words
overheard in imagination:

"Confound the fellow! What has he come here for?"

"Mary will say 'not at home.'"

"But he has spotted us. Do go and get rid of him."

"Such an old friend, dear."

"We haven't time for old fossils. Tell him to go and bury
himself."

And (in my sensitive fancy) she had delivered the import of the
message. I had gathered that my visit was ill-timed. I was
preparing to cut it short, when Leonard himself came up and
whisked me against my will to the tea-table. If my hypothesis were
correct he had evidently changed his mind as to the desirability
of getting rid, in so summary a fashion, of what he may have
considered to be an impertinent and malicious little factor in
Wellingsford gossip.

At any rate, if he was playing a part, he played it very well. It
was not in the power of man to be more cordial and gracious. He
gave me a vivid account of the campaign. He had been through
everything, the retreat from Mons, the Battle of the Aisne, the
great rush north, and the Battle of Neuve Chapelle on the 17th of
March. I listened, fascinated, to his tale, which he told with a
true soldier's impersonal modesty.

"I was glad," said I, after a while, "to see you twice mentioned
in dispatches."

Mrs. Boyce turned on me triumphantly. "He is going to get his D.
S. O."

"By Jove!" said I.

Leonard laughed, threw one gaitered leg over the other and held up
his hands at her.

"Oh, you feminine person!" He smiled at me. "I told my dear old
mother as a dead and solemn secret."

"But it will be gazetted in a few days, dear."

"One can never be absolutely sure of these things until they're in
black and white. A pretty ass I'd look if there was a hitch--say
through some fool of a copying clerk--and I didn't get it after
all. It's only dear, silly understanding things like mothers that
would understand. Other people wouldn't. Don't you think I'm
right, Meredyth?"

Of course he was. I have known, in my time, of many
disappointments. It is not every recommendation for honours that
becomes effective. I congratulated him, however, and swore to
secrecy.

"It's all luck," said he. "Just because a man happens to be
spotted. If my regiment got its deserts, every Jack man would walk
about in a suit of armour made of Victoria Crosses. Give me some
more tea, mother."

"The thing I shall never understand, dear," she said, artlessly,
looking up at him, while she handed him his cup, "is when you see
a lot of murderous Germans rushing at you with guns and shells and
bayonets, how you are not afraid."

He threw back his head and laughed in his debonair fashion; but I
watched him narrowly and I saw the corners of his mouth twitch for
the infinitesimal fraction of a second.

"Oh, sometimes we're in an awful funk, I assure you," he replied
gaily. "Ask Meredyth."

"We may be," said I, "but we daren't shew it--I'm speaking of
officers. If an officer funks he's generally responsible for the
death of goodness knows how many men. And if the men funk they're
liable to be shot for cowardice in the face of the enemy."

"And what happens to officers who are afraid?"

"If it's known, they get broke," said I.

Boyce swallowed his tea at a gulp, set down the cup, and strode to
the window. There was a short pause. Presently he turned.

"Physical fear is a very curious thing," he said in a voice
unnecessarily loud. "I've seen it take hold of men of proved
courage and paralyse them. It's just like an epileptic fit--beyond
a man's control. I've known a fellow--the most reckless, hare-
brained daredevil you can imagine--to stand petrified with fear on
the bank of a river, and let a wounded comrade drown before his
eyes. And he was a good swimmer too."

"What happened to him?" I asked.

He met my gaze for a moment, looked away, and then met it again--
it seemed defiantly.

"What happened to him? Well--" there was the tiniest possible
pause--a pause that only an uneasy, suspicious repository of the
abominable story of Vilboek's Farm could have noticed--"Well, as
he stood there he got plugged--and that was the end of him. But
what I--"

"Was he an officer, dear?"

"No, no, mother, a sergeant," he answered abruptly, and in the
same breath continued. "What I was going to say is this. No one as
far as I know has ever bothered to work out the psychology of
fear. Especially the sudden thing that hits a man's heart and
makes him stand stock-still like a living corpse--unable to move a
muscle--all his willpower out of gear--just as a motor is out of
gear. I've seen a lot of it. Those men oughtn't to be called
cowards. It's as much a fit, say, as epilepsy. Allowances ought to
made for them."

It was a warm day, the windows were closed, my valetudinarian
hostess having a horror of draughts, and a cheery fire was blazing
up the chimney. Boyce took out a handkerchief and mopped his
forehead.

"Dear old mother," said he, "you keep this room like an oven."

"It is you who have got so excited talking, dear," said Mrs.
Boyce. "I'm sure it can't be good for your heart. It is just the
same with me. I remember I had to speak quite severely to Mary a
week--no, to-day's Tuesday--ten days ago, and I had dreadful
palpitations afterwards and broke out into a profuse perspiration
and had to send for Doctor Miles."

"Now, that's funny," said I. "When I'm excited about anything I
grow quite cold."

Boyce lit a cigarette and laughed. "I don't see where the
excitement in the present case comes in. Mother started an
interesting hare, and I followed it up. Anyhow--"he threw himself
on the sofa, blew a kiss to his mother in the most charming way in
the world, and smiled on me--"anyhow, to see you two in this
dearest bit of dear old England is like a dream. And I'm not going
to think of the waking up. I want all the cushions and the
lavender and the neat maid's caps and aprons--I said to Mary this
morning when she drew my curtains: 'Stay just there and let me
look at you so that I can realise I'm at home and not in my little
grey trench in West Flanders'--she got red and no doubt thought me
a lunatic and felt inclined to squawk--but she stayed and looked
jolly pretty and refreshing--only for a minute or two, after which
I dismissed her--yes, my dears, I want everything that the old
life means, the white table linen, the spring flowers, the scent
of the air which has never known the taint of death, and all that
this beautiful mother of England, with her knitting needles,
stands for. I want to have a debauch of sweet and beautiful
things."

"As far as I can give them you shall have them. My dear--" she
dropped her knitting in her lap and looked over at him tragically
--"I quite forgot to ask. Did Mary put bath-salts, as I ordered,
into your bath this morning?"

Leonard threw away his cigarette and slapped his leg.

"By George!" he cried. "That explains it. I was wondering where
the Dickens that smell of ammonia came from."

"If you use it every day it makes your skin so nice and soft,"
remarked Mrs. Boyce.

He laughed, and made the obvious jest on the use of bath-salts in
the trenches.

"I wonder, mother, whether you have any idea of what trenches and
dug-outs look like."

He told her, very picturesquely, and went on to a general sketch
of life at the front. He entertained me with interesting talk for
the rest of my visit. I have already said that he was a man of
great personal charm.

He accompanied me to the car and saw me comfortably tucked in.

"You won't give me away, will you?" he said, shaking hands.

"How?" I asked.

"By telling any one I'm here."

I promised and drove off. Marigold, full of the tea that is given
to a guest, strove cheerfully to engage me in conversation. I hate
to snub Marigold, excellent and devoted fellow, so I let him talk;
but my mind was occupied with worrying problems.





CHAPTER VI


Leonard Boyce had received me on sufferance. I had come upon him
while he was imprudently exposing himself to view. There had been
no way out of it. But he made it clear that he desired no other
Wellingsfordian to invade his privacy. Secretly he had come to see
his mother and secretly he intended to go. I remembered that
before he went to the front he had not come home, but his mother
had met him in London. He had asked me for no local news. He had
inquired after the welfare of none of his old friends. Never an
allusion to poor Oswald Fenimore's gallant death--he used to run
in and out of Wellings Park as if it were his own house. What had
he against the place which for so many years had been his home?

With regard to Betty Fairfax, he had loved and ridden away, it is
true, leaving her disconsolate. But though everyone knew of the
engagement, no one had suspected the defection. Betty was a young
woman who could keep her own counsel and baffle any curiosity-
monger or purveyor of gossip in the country. So when she married
Captain Connor, a little gasp went round the neighbourhood, which
for the first time remembered Leonard Boyce. There were some who
blamed her for callous treatment of Boyce, away and forgotten at
the front. The majority, however, took the matter calmly, as we
have had to take far more amazing social convulsions. The fact
remained that Betty was married, and there was no reason whatever,
on the score of the old engagement, for Boyce to manifest such
exaggerated shyness with regard to Wellingsford society.

If it had been any other man than Boyce, I should not have worried
about the matter at all. Save that I was deeply attached to Betty,
what had her discarded lover's attitude to do with me? But Boyce
was Boyce, the man of the damnable story of Vilboek's Farm. And
he, of his own accord, had revived in my mind that story in all
its intensity. A chance foolish question, such as thousands of
gentle, sheltered women have put to their suddenly,
uncomprehended, suddenly deified sons and husbands, had obviously
disturbed his nervous equilibrium. That little reflex twitch at
the corner of his lips--I have seen it often in the old times. I
should like to have had him stripped to the waist so that I could
have seen his heart--the infallible test. At moments of mighty
moral strain men can keep steady eyes and nostrils and mouth and
speech; but they cannot control that tell-tale diaphragm of flesh
over the heart. I have known it to cause the death of many a
Kaffir spy. ... But, at any rate, there was the twitch of the lips
... I deliberately threw weight into the scale of Mrs. Boyce's
foolish question. If he had not lost his balance, why should he
have launched into an almost passionate defence of the physical
coward?

My memory went back to the narrative of the poor devil in the Cape
Town hospital. Boyce's description of the general phenomenon was a
deadly corroboration of Somers's account of the individual case.
They had used the same word--"paralysed." Boyce had made a fierce
and definite apologia for the very act of which Somers had accused
him. He put it down to the sudden epilepsy of fear for which a man
was irresponsible. Somers's story had never seemed so convincing--
the first part of it, at least--the part relating to the paralysis
of terror. But the second part--the account of the diabolical
ingenuity by means of which Boyce rehabilitated himself--instead
of blowing his brains out like a gentleman--still hammered at the
gates of my credulity.

Well--granted the whole thing was true--why revive it after
fifteen years' dead silence, and all of a sudden, just on account
of an idle question? Even in South Africa, his "mention" had
proved his courage. Now, with the D. S. O. a mere matter of
gazetting, it was established beyond dispute.

On the other hand, if the Vilboek story, more especially the
second part, was true, what reparation could he make in the eyes
of honourable men?--in his own eyes, if he himself had succeeded
to the status of an honourable man? Would not any decent soldier
smite him across the face instead of grasping him by the hand? I
was profoundly worried.

Moreover Betty, level-headed Betty, had called him a devil. Why?

If the second part of Somers's story were true, he had acted like
a devil. There is no other word for it. Now, what concrete
diabolical facts did Betty know? Or had her instinctive feminine
insight pierced through the man's outer charm and merely perceived
horns, tail, and cloven hoof cast like a shadow over his soul?

How was I to know?

She came to dine with me the next evening: a dear way she had of
coming uninvited, and God knows how a lonely cripple valued it.
She was in uniform, being too busy to change, and looked
remarkably pretty. She brought with her a cheery letter from her
husband, received that morning, and read me such bits as the
profane might hear, her eyes brightening as she glanced over the
sections that she skipped. Beyond doubt her marriage had brought
her pleasure and pride. The pride she would have felt to some
extent, I think, if she had married a grampus; for when a woman
has a husband at the front she feels that she is taking her part
in the campaign and exposing herself vicariously to hardship and
shrapnel; and in the eyes of the world she gains thereby a little
in stature, a thing dear to every right-minded woman. But Betty's
husband was not a grampus, but a very fine fellow, a mate to be
wholly proud of: and he loved her devotedly and expressed his love
beautifully loverwise, as her tell-tale face informed me.
Gratefully and sturdily she had set herself out to be happy. She
was succeeding. ... Lord bless you! Millions of women who have
married, not the wretch they loved, but the other man, have lived
happy ever after. No: I had no fear for Betty now. I could not see
that she had any fear for herself.

After dinner she sat on the floor by my side and smoked cigarettes
in great content. She had done a hard day's work at the hospital;
her husband had done a hard day's work--probably was still doing
it--in Flanders. Both deserved well of their country and their
consciences. She was giving a poor lonely paralytic, who had given
his legs years ago to the aforesaid country, a delightful evening.
... No, I'm quite sure such a patronising thought never entered my
Betty's head. After all, my upper half is sound, and I can talk
sense or nonsense with anybody. What have one's legs to do with a
pleasant after-dinner conversation? Years ago I swore a great oath
that I would see them damned before they got in the way of my
intelligence.

We were getting on famously. We had put both war and Wellingsford
behind us, and talked of books. I found to my dismay that this
fair and fearless high product of modernity had far less
acquaintance with Matthew Arnold than with the Evangelist of the
same praenomen. She had never heard of "The Forsaken Merman," one
of the most haunting romantic poems in the English language. I
pointed to a bookcase and bade her fetch the volume. She brought
it and settled down again by my chair, and, as a punishment of
ignorance, and for the good of her soul, I began to read aloud.
She is an impressionable young person and yet one of remarkable
candour. If she had not been held by the sea-music of the poem,
she would not have kept her deep, steady brown eyes fixed on me. I
have no hesitation in repeating that we were getting on famously
and enjoying ourselves immensely. I got nearly to the end:

"... Here came a mortal, But faithless was she, And alone dwell
forever The Kings of the sea. But, children at midnight--"

The door opened wide. Topping his long stiff body, Marigold's ugly
one-eyed head appeared, and, as if he was tremendously proud of
himself, he announced:

"Major Boyce."

Boyce strode quickly past him and, suddenly aware of Betty by my
side, stopped short, like a private suddenly summoned to
attention. Marigold, unconscious of the blackest curses that had
ever fallen upon him during his long and blundering life, made a
perfect and self-satisfied exit. Betty sprang to her feet, held
her tall figure very erect, and faced the untimely visitor, her
cheeks flushing deep red. For an appreciable time, say, thirty
seconds, Boyce stood stock still, looking at her from under heavy
contracted brows. Then he recovered himself, smiled, and advanced
to her with outstretched hand, But, on his movement, she had been
quick to turn and bend down in order to pick up the book that had
fallen from my fingers on the further side of my chair. So,
swiftly he wheeled to me with his handshake. It was very deft
manoeuvring on both sides.

"The faithful Marigold didn't tell me that you weren't alone,
Meredyth," he said in his cordial, charming way. "Otherwise I
shouldn't have intruded. But my dear old mother had an attack of
something and went to bed immediately after dinner, and I thought
I'd come round and have a smoke and a drink in your company."

Betty, who had occupied herself by replacing Matthew Arnold's
poems in the bookcase, caught up the box of cigars that lay on the
brass tray table by my side, and offered it to him.

"Here is the smoke," she said.

And when, after a swift, covert glance at her, he had selected a
cigar, she went to the bell-push by the mantelpiece.

"The drinks will be here in a minute."

In order to do something to save this absurd situation, I drew
from my waistcoat pocket a little cigar-cutter attached to my
watch-chain, and clipped the end of his cigar. I also lit a match
from my box and handed it up to him. When he had finished with the
match he threw it into the fireplace and turned to Betty.

"My congratulations are a bit late, but I hope I may offer them."

She said, "Thank you." Waved a hand. "Won't you sit down?"

"Wasn't it rather sudden?" he asked.

"Everything in war time is sudden--except the action of the
British Government. Your own appearance to-night is sudden."

He laughed at her jest and explained, much as he had done to me,
his reasons for wishing to keep his visit to Wellingsford a
secret. Meanwhile Marigold had brought in decanters and syphons.
Betty attended to Boyce's needs with a provoking air of
nonchalance. If a notorious German imbrued in the blood of babes
had chanced to be in her hospital, she would have given him his
medicine with just the same air. Although no one could have
specified a lack of courtesy towards a guest--for in my house she
played hostess--there was an indefinable touch of cold contumely
in her attitude. Whether he felt the hostility as acutely as I
did, I cannot say; but he carried it off with a swaggering grace.
He bowed to her over his glass.

"Here's to the fortunate and gallant fellow over there."

I saw her knuckles whiten as, with an inclination of the head, she
acknowledged the toast.

"By the way," said he, "what's his regiment? My good mother told
me his name. Captain Connor, isn't it? But for the rest she is
vague. She's the vaguest old dear in the world. I found out to-day
that she thought there was a long row of cannons, hundreds of
them, all in a line, in front of the English Army, and a long row
in front of the German Army, and, when there was a battle, that
they all blazed away. So when I asked her whether your husband was
in the Life Guards or the Army Service Corps, she said cheerfully
that it was either one or the other but she wasn't quite sure. So
do give me some reliable information."

"My husband is in the 10th Wessex Fusiliers, a Territorial
battalion," she replied coldly.

"I hope some day to have the pleasure of making his acquaintance."

"Stranger things have happened," said Betty. She glanced at the
clock and rose abruptly. "It's time I was getting back to the
hospital."

Boyce rose too. "How are you going?" he asked.

"I'm walking."

He advanced a step towards her. "Won't you let me run you round in
the car?"

"I prefer to walk."

Her tone was final. She took affectionate leave of me and went to
the door, which Boyce held open.

"Good-night," she said, without proffering her hand.

He followed her out into the hall.

"Betty," he said in a low voice, "won't you ever forgive me?"

"I have no feelings towards you either of forgiveness or
resentment," she replied.

They did not mean to be overheard, but my hearing is unusually
acute, and I could not help catching their conversation.

"I know I seem to have behaved badly to you."

"You have behaved worse to others," said Betty. "I don't wonder at
your shrinking from showing your face here." Then, louder, for my
benefit. "Good-night, Major Boyce. I really can walk up to the
hospital by myself."

Evidently she walked away and Boyce after her, for I heard him
say:

"You shan't go till you've told me what you mean."

What she replied I don't know. To judge by the slam of the front
door it must have been something defiant. Presently he entered
debonair, with a smile on his lips.

"I'm afraid I've left you in a draught," he said, shutting the
door. "I couldn't resist having a word with her and wishing her
happiness and the rest of it. We were engaged once upon a time."

"I know," said I.

"I hope you don't think I did wrong in releasing her from the
engagement. I don't consider a man has a right to go on active
service--especially on such service as the present war--and keep a
girl bound at home. Still less has he a right to marry her. What
happens in so many cases? A fortnight's married life. The man goes
to the front. Then ping! or whizz-bang! and that's the end of him,
and so the girl is left."

"On the other hand," said I, "you must remember that the girl may
hold very strong opinions and take pings and whizz-bangs very
deliberately into account."

Boyce helped himself to another whisky and soda. "It's a matter
for the individual conscience. I decided one way. Connor obviously
decided another, and, like a lucky fellow, found Betty of his way
of thinking. Perhaps I have old-fashioned notions." He took a long
pull at his drink. "Well, it can't be helped," he said with a
smile. "The other fellow has won, and I must take it gracefully.
... By George! wasn't she looking stunning to-night--in that kit?
... I hope you didn't mind my bursting in on you--"

"Of course not," said I, politely.

He drained his glass. "The fact is," said he, "this war is a
nerve-racking business. I never dreamed I was so jumpy until I
came home. I hate being by myself. I've kept my poor devoted
mother up till one o'clock in the morning. To-night she struck,
small blame to her; but, after five minutes on my lones, I felt as
if I should go off my head. So I routed out the car and came
along. But of course I didn't expect to see Betty. The sight of
Betty in the flesh as a married woman nearly bowled me over. May I
help myself again?" He poured out a very much stiffer drink than
before, and poured half of it down his throat. "It's not a joyous
thing to see the woman one has been crazy over the wife of another
fellow."

"I suppose it isn't," said I.

Of course I might have made some subtle and cunning remark,
suavely put a leading question which would have led him on, in his
unbalanced mood, to confidential revelations. But the man was a
distinguished soldier and my guest. To what he chose to tell me
voluntarily I could listen. I could do no more. He did not reply
to my last unimportant remark, but lay back in his armchair
watching the blue spirals of smoke from the end of his cigar.
There was a fairly long silence.

I was worried by the talk I had overheard through the open door.
"You have behaved worse to others. I don't wonder at your
shrinking from showing your face here." Betty had, weeks ago,
called him a devil. She had treated him to-night in a manner
which, if not justified, was abominable. I was forced to the
conclusion that Betty was fully aware of some discreditable
chapter in the man's life which had nothing to do with the affair
at Vilboek's Farm, which, indeed, had to do with another woman and
this humdrum little town of Wellingsford. Otherwise why did she
taunt him with hiding from the light of Wellingsfordian day?

Now, please don't think me little-minded. Or, if you do think so,
please remember the conditions under which I have lived for so
many years and grant me your kind indulgence for a confession I
have to make. Besides being worried, I felt annoyed. Wellingsford
was my little world. I knew everybody in it. I had grown to regard
myself as the repository of all its gossip. The fraction of it
that I retailed was a matter of calculated discretion. I made a
little hobby--it was a foible, a vanity, what you will--of my
omniscience. I knew months ahead the dates of the arrivals of
young Wellingsfordians in this world of pain and plenitude. I knew
of maidens who were wronged and youths who were jilted; of wives
who led their husbands a deuce of a dance, and of wives who kept
their husbands out of the bankruptcy court. When young Trexham,
the son of the Lord Lieutenant of the county, married a minor
light of musical comedy at a registrar's office, I was the first
person in the place to be told; and I flatter myself that I was
instrumental in inducing a pig-headed old idiot to receive an
exceedingly charming daughter-in-law. I loved to look upon
Wellingsford as an open book. Can you blame me for my resentment
at coming across, so to speak, a couple of pages glued together?
The only logical inference from Betty's remark was that Boyce had
behaved abominably and even notoriously to a woman in
Wellingsford. To do him justice, I declare I had never heard his
name associated with any woman or girl in the place save Betty
herself. I felt that, in some crooked fashion, or the other, I had
been done out of my rights.

And there, placidly smoking his cigar and watching the wreaths of
blue smoke with the air of an idle seraph contemplating a wisp of
cirrus in Heaven's firmament, sat the man who could have given me
the word of the enigma.

He broke the silence by saying:

"Have you ever seriously considered the real problems of the
Balkans?"

Now what on earth had the Balkans to do with the thoughts that
must have been rolling at the back of the man's mind? I was both
disappointed and relieved. I expected him to resume the personal
talk, and I dreaded lest he should entrust me with embarrassing
confidences. After three strong whiskies and sodas a man is apt to
relax hold of his discretion. ... Anyhow, he jerked me back to my
position of host. I made some sort of polite reply. He smiled.

"You, my dear Meredyth, like the rest of the country, are half
asleep. In a few months' time you'll get the awakening of your
life."

He began to discourse on the diplomatic situation. Months
afterwards I remembered what he had said that night and how
accurate had been his forecast. He talked brilliantly for over an
hour, during which, keenly interested in his arguments, I lost the
puzzle of the man in admiration of the fine soldier and clear and
daring thinker. It was only when he had gone that I began to worry
again.

And before I went to sleep I had fresh cause for anxious
speculation.

"Marigold," said I, when he came in as usual to carry me to bed,
"didn't I tell you that Major Boyce particularly wanted no one to
know that he was in the town?"

"Yes, sir," said Marigold. "I've told nobody."

"And yet you showed him in without informing him that Mrs. Connor
was here. Really you ought to have had more tact."

Marigold received his reprimand with the stolidity of the old
soldier. I have known men who have been informed that they would
be court-martialled and most certainly shot, make the same reply.

"Very good, sir," said he.

I softened. I was not Marigold's commanding officer, but his very
grateful friend. "You see," said I, "they were engaged before Mrs.
Connor married--I needn't tell you that; it was common knowledge--
and so their sudden meeting was awkward."

"Mrs. Marigold has already explained, sir," said he.

I chuckled inwardly all the way to my bedroom.

"All the same, sir," said he, aiding me in my toilet, which he did
with stiff military precision, "I don't think the Major is as
incognighto" (the spelling is phonetic) "as he would like.
Prettilove was shaving me this morning and told me the Major was
here. As I considered it my duty, I told him he was a liar, and he
was so upset that he nicked my Adam's apple and I was that covered
with blood that I accused him of trying to cut my throat, and I
went out and finished shaving myself at home, which is
unsatisfactory when you only have a thumb on your right hand to
work the razor."

I laughed, picturing the scene. Prettilove is an inoffensive
little rabbit of a man. Marigold might sit for the model of a war-
scarred mercenary of the middle ages, and when he called a man a
liar he did it with accentuaton and vehemence. No wonder
Prettilove jumped.

"And then again this evening, sir," continued Marigold, slipping
me into my pyjama jacket, "as I was starting the Major's car, who
should be waiting there for him but Mr. Gedge."

"Gedge?" I cried.

"Yes, sir. Waiting by the side of the car. 'Can I have a word with
you, Major Boyce?' says he. 'No, you can't,' says the Major. 'I
think it's advisable,' says he. 'Those repairs are very pressing.'
'All right,' says the Major, 'jump in.' Then he says: 'That'll do,
Marigold. Good-night.' And he drives off with Mr. Gedge. Well, if
Mr. Gedge and Prettilove know he's here, then everyone knows it."

"Was Gedge inside the drive?" I asked. The drive was a small
semicircular sort of affair, between gate and gate.

"He was standing by the car waiting," said Marigold. "Now, sir."
He lifted me with his usual cast-iron tenderness into bed and
pulled the coverings over me. "It's a funny time to talk about
house repairs at eleven o'clock, at night," he remarked.

"Nothing is funny in war-time," said I.

"Either nothing or everything," said Marigold. He fussed
methodically about the room, picked up an armful of clothes, and
paused by the door, his hand on the switch.

"Anything more, sir?"

"Nothing, thank you, Marigold."

"Good-night, sir."

The room was in darkness. Marigold shut the door. I was alone.

What the deuce was the meaning of this waylaying of Boyce by
Daniel Gedge?





CHAPTER VII


Major Boyce has gone, sir," said Marigold, the next morning, as I
was tapping my breakfast egg.

"Gone?" I echoed. Boyce had made no reference the night before to
so speedy a departure.

"By the 8.30 train, sir."

Every train known by a scheduled time at Wellingsford goes to
London. There may be other trains proceeding from the station in
the opposite direction but nobody heeds them. Boyce had taken
train to London. I asked my omniscient sergeant:

"How did you find that out?"

It appeared it was the driver of the Railway Delivery Van. I
smiled at Boyce's ostrich-like faith in the invisibility of his
hinder bulk. What could occur in Wellingsford without it being
known at once to vanmen and postmen and barbers and servants and
masters and mistresses? How could a man hope to conceal his goings
and comings and secret actions? He might just as well expect to
take a secluded noontide bath in the fountain in Piccadilly
Circus.

"Perhaps that's why the matter of those repairs was so pressing,
sir," said Marigold.

"No doubt of it," said I.

Marigold hung about, his finger-tips pushing towards me mustard
and apples and tulips and everything that one does not eat with
egg. But it was no use. I had no desire to pursue the
conversation. I continued my breakfast stolidly and read the
newspaper propped up against the coffee-pot. So many circumstances
connected with Boyce's visit were of a nature that precluded
confidential discussion with Marigold,--that precluded, indeed,
confidential discussion with anyone else. The suddenness of his
departure I learned that afternoon from Mrs. Boyce, who sent me by
hand a miserable letter characteristically rambling. From it I
gathered certain facts. Leonard had come into her bedroom at seven
o'clock, awakening her from the first half-hour's sleep she had
enjoyed all night, with the news that he had been unexpectedly
summoned back. When she came to think of it, she couldn't imagine
how he got the news, for the post did not arrive till eight
o'clock, and Mary said no telegram had been delivered and there
had been no call on the telephone. But she supposed the War Office
had secret ways of communicating with officers which it would not
be well to make known. The whole of this war, with its killing off
of the sons of the best families in the land, and the sleeping in
the mud with one's boots on, to say nothing of not being able to
change for dinner, and the way in which they knew when to shoot
and when not to shoot, was all so mysterious that she had long ago
given up hope of understanding any of its details. All she could
do was to pray God that her dear boy should be spared. At any
rate, she knew the duty of an English mother when the country was
in danger; so she had sent him away with a brave face and her
blessing, as she had done before. But, although English mothers
could show themselves Spartans--(she spelt it "Spartians," dear
lady, but no matter)--yet they were women and had to sit at home
and weep. In the meanwhile, her palpitations had come on
dreadfully bad, and so had her neuritis, and she had suffered
dreadfully after eating some fish at dinner which she was sure
Pennideath, the fishmonger--she always felt that man was an
anarchist in disguise--had bought out of the condemned stock at
Billingsgate, and none of the doctor's medicines were of the
slightest good to her, and she was heartbroken at having to part
so suddenly from Leonard, and would I spare half an hour to
comfort an old woman who had sent her only son to die for his
country and was ready, when it pleased God, if not sooner, to die
in the same sacred cause?

So of course I went. The old lady, propped on pillows in an
overheated room, gave me tea and poured into my ear all the
anguish of her simple heart. In an abstracted, anxious way, she
ate a couple of crumpets and a wedge of cake with almond icing,
and was comforted.

We continued our discussion of the war--or rather Leonard, for
with her Leonard seemed to be the war. She made some remark
deliciously inept--I wish I could remember it. I made a sly
rejoinder. She sat bolt upright and a flush came into her Dresden-
china cheek and her old eyes flashed.

"You may think I'm a silly old woman, Duncan. I dare say I am. I
can't take in things as I used to do when I was young. But if
Leonard should be killed in the war--I think of it night and day--
what I should like to do would be to drive to the Market Square of
Wellingsford and wave a Union Jack round and round and fall down
dead."

I made some sort of sympathetic gesture.

"And I certainly should," she added.

"My dear friend," said I, "if I could move from this confounded
chair, I would kiss your brave hands."

And how many brave hands of English mothers, white and delicate,
coarse and toil-worn, do not demand the wondering, heart-full
homage of us all?

And hundreds of thousands of them don't know why we are fighting.
Hundreds of thousands of them have never read a newspaper in their
lives. I doubt whether they would understand one if they tried, I
doubt whether all could read one in the literal sense of the word.
We have had--we have still--the most expensive and rottenest
system of primary education in the world, the worst that
squabbling sectarians can devise. Arab children squatting round
the courtyard of a Mosque and swaying backwards and forwards as
they get by heart meaningless bits of the Koran, are not sent out
into life more inadequately armed with elementary educational
weapons than are English children. Our state of education has
nominally been systematised for forty-five years, and yet now in
our hospitals we have splendid young fellows in their early
twenties who can neither read nor write. I have talked with them.
I have read to them. I have written letters for them. Clean-cut,
decent, brave, honourable Englishmen--not gutter-bred Hooligans
dragged from the abyss by the recruiting sergeant, but men who
have thrown up good employment because something noble inside them
responded to the Great Call. And to the eternal disgrace of
governments in this disastrously politician-ridden land such men
have not been taught to read and write. It is of no use anyone
saying to me that it is not so. I know of my own certain intimate
knowledge that it is so.

Even among those who technically have "the Three R's," I have met
scores of men in our Wellingsford Hospital who, bedridden for
months, would give all they possess to be able to enjoy a novel--
say a volume of W. W. Jacobs, the writer who above all others has
conferred the precious boon of laughter on our wounded--but to
whom the intellectual strain of following the significance of
consecutive words is far too great. Thousands and thousands of men
have lain in our hospitals deprived, by the criminal insanity of
party politicians, of the infinite consolation of books.

Christ, whom all these politicians sanctimoniously pretend to make
such a fuss of, once said that a house divided against itself
cannot stand. And yet we regard this internecine conflict between
our precious political parties as a sacred institution. By Allah,
we are a funny people!

Of course your officials at the Board of Education--that
beautiful timber-headed, timber-hearted, timber-souled structure--
could come down on me with an avalanche of statistics. "Look at
our results," they cry. I look. There are certain brains that even
our educational system cannot benumb. A few clever ones, at the
cost of enormously expensive machinery, are sent to the
universities, where they learn how to teach others the important
things whereby they achieved their own unimportant success. The
shining lights are those whom we turn out as syndicalist leaders
and other kinds of anti-patriotic demagogues. We systematically
deny them the wine of thought, but give them the dregs. But in the
past we did not care; they were vastly clever people, a credit to
our national system. It gave them chances which they took. We were
devilish proud of them.

On the other hand, the vast mass are sent away with the
intellectual equipment of a public school-boy of twelve, and, as
I have declared, a large remnant have not been taught even how to
read and write. The storm of political controversy on educational
matters has centred round such questions as whether the story of
Joseph and his Brethren and the Parable of the Prodigal Son should
be taught to little Baptists by a Church of England teacher, and
what proportion of rates paid by Church of England ratepayers
should go to giving little Baptists a Baptistical training. If
there was a Christ who could come down among us, with what
scorching sarcasm would he not shrivel up the Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites, who in His Name have prevented the People
from learning how to read and write.

Look through Hansard. There never has been a Debate in the House
of Commons devoted to the question of Education itself. If the War
can teach us any lessons, as a nation--and sometimes I doubt
whether it will--it ought at least to teach us the essential
vicious rottenness of our present educational system.

This tirade may seem a far cry from Mrs. Boyce and her sister
mothers. It is not. I started by saying that there are hundreds of
thousands of British mothers, with sons in the Army, who have
never read a line of print dealing with the war, who have the
haziest notion of what it is all about. All they know is that we
are fighting Germans, who for some incomprehensible reason have
declared themselves to be our enemies; that the Germans, by
hearsay accounts, are dreadful people who stick babies on bayonets
and drop bombs on women and children. They really know little
more. But that is enough. They know that it is the part of a man
to fight for his country. They would not have their sons be called
cowards. They themselves have the blind, instinctive, and
therefore sacred love of country, which is named patriotism--and
they send forth their sons to fight.

I stand up to kiss the white and delicate hand of the gentlewoman
who sends her boy to the war, for its owner knows as well as I do
(or ought to) all that is involved in this colossal struggle. But
to the toil-worn, coarse-handed mother I go on bended knees;
nothing intellectual comes within the range of her ideas. Her boy
is fighting for England. She would be ashamed if he were not. Were
she a man she would fight too. He has gone "with a good 'eart"--
the stereotyped phrase with which every English private soldier,
tongue-tied, hides the expression of his unconquerable soul. How
many times have I not heard it from wounded men healed of their
wounds? I have never heard anything else. "The man who says he
WANTS to go back is a liar. But if they send me, I'll go WITH A
GOOD 'EART"--The phrase which ought to be immortalized on every
grave in Flanders and France and Gallipoli and Mesopotamia.

17735 P'V'TE THOMAS ATKINS 1ST GOD'S OWN REG'T HE DIED WITH A GOOD
'EART

So, you see, I looked at this rather silly malade imaginaire of an
old lady with whom I was taking tea, and suddenly conceived for
her a vast respect--even veneration. I say "rather silly." I had
many a time qualified the adjective much more forcibly. I took her
to have the intellectual endowment of a hen. But then she flashed
out suddenly before me an elderly Jeanne d'Arc. That to me Leonard
Boyce was suspect did not enter at all into the question. To her--
and that was all that mattered--he was Sir Galahad, Lancelot, King
Arthur, Bayard, St. George, Hector, Lysander, Miltiades, all
rolled into one. The passion of her life was spent on him. To do
him justice, he had never failed to display to her the most tender
affection. In her eyes he was perfection. His death would mean the
wiping out of everything between Earth and Heaven. And yet,
paramount in her envisagement of such a tragedy was the idea of a
public proclamation of the cause of England in which he died.

In this war the women of England--the women of Great Britain and
Ireland--the women of the far-flung regions of the British Empire,
have their part.

Now and then mild business matters call me up to London. On these
occasions Marigold gets himself up in a kind of yachting kit which
he imagines will differentiate him from the ordinary chauffeur and
at the same time proclaim the dignity of the Meredyth-Marigold
establishment. He loves to swagger up the steps of my Service Club
and announce my arrival to the Hall Porter, who already, warned by
telephone of my advent, has my little wicker-work tricycle chair
in readiness. I think he feels, dear fellow, that he and I are
keeping our end up; that, although there are only bits of us left,
we are there by inalienable right as part and parcel of the
British Army--none of your Territorials or Kitcheners, but the old
original British Army whose prestige and honour were those of his
own straight soul. The Hall Porter is an ex-Sergeant-Major, and he
and Marigold are old acquaintances, and the meeting of the two
warriors is acknowledged by a wink and a military jerk of the
head. I think it is Marigold that impresses Bunworthy with a
respect for me, for that august functionary never fails to descend
the steps and cross the pavement to my modest little two-seater;
an act of graciousness which (so I am given to understand by my
friends) he will only perform in the case of Royalty Itself. A
mere Field-marshal has to mount the steps unattended like any
subaltern.

These red-letter days when I drive through the familiar (and now
exciting) hubbub of London, I love (strange taste!) every motor
omnibus, every pretty woman, every sandwich-man, every fine young
fellow in khaki, every car-load of men in blue hospital uniform. I
love the smell of London, the cinematographic picture of London,
the thrill of London. To understand what I mean you have only got
to get rid of your legs and keep your heart and nerves and
memories, and live in a little country town.

Yes, my visits to London are red-letter days. To get there with
any enjoyment to myself involves such a fussification, and such an
unauthorised claim on the services of other people, that my visits
are few and far between.

A couple of hours in a club smoking-room--to the normal man a mere
putting in of time, a vain surcease from boredom, a vacuous habit
--is to me, a strange wonder and delight. After Wellingsford the
place is resonant with actualities. I hear all sorts of things;
mostly lies, I know; but what matter? When a man tells me that his
cousin knows a man attached as liaison officer to the staff of
General Joffre, who has given out confidentially that such and
such a thing is going to happen I am all ears. I feel that I am
sucked into the great whirlpool of Vast Events. I don't care a bit
about being disillusioned afterwards. The experience has done me
good, made a man of me and sent me back to Wellingsford as an
oracle. And if you bring me a man who declares that he does not
like being an oracle, I will say to his face that he is an
unblushing liar.

All this is by way of preface to the statement that on the third
of May (vide diary) I went to the club. It was just after lunch
and the great smoking-room was full of men in khaki and men in
blue and gold, with a sprinkling of men, mostly elderly, in mufti;
and from their gilt frames the full-length portraits of departed
men of war in gorgeous uniforms looked down superciliously on
their more sadly attired descendants. I got into a corner by the
door, so as to be out of the way, for I knew by experience that
should there be in the room a choleric general, he would
inevitably trip over the casually extended front wheel of my
chair, greatly to the scandal of modest ears and to my own
physical discomfiture.

Various seniors came up and passed the time of the day with me--
one or two were bald-headed retired colonels of sixty, dressed in
khaki, with belts like equators on a terrestrial globe and with a
captain's three stars on their sleeves. Gallant old boys, full of
gout and softness, they had sunk their rank and taken whatever
dull jobs, such as guarding internment camps or railway bridges,
the War Office condescendingly thought fit to give them. They
listened sympathetically to my grievances, for they had grievances
of their own. When soldiers have no grievances the Army will
perish of smug content.

"Why can't they give me a billet in the Army Pay and let me
release a man sounder of wind and limb?" I asked. "What's the good
of legs to a man who sits on his hunkers all day in an office and
fills up Army forms? I hate seeing you lucky fellows in uniform."

"We're not a pretty sight," said the most rotund, who was a wag in
his way.

Then we discussed what we knew and what we didn't know of the
Battle of Ypres, and the withdrawal of our Second Army, and shook
our heads dolorously over the casualty lists, every one of which
in those days contained the names of old comrades and of old
comrades' boys. And when they had finished their coffee and mild
cigars they went off well contented to their dull jobs and the
room began to thin. Other acquaintances on their way out paused
for a handshake and a word, and I gathered scraps of information
that had come "straight from Kitchener," and felt wonderfully wise
and cheerful.

I had been sitting alone for a few minutes when a man rose from a
far corner, a tall soldierly figure, his arm in a sling, and came
straight towards me with that supple, easy stride that only years
of confident command can give. He had keen blue eyes and a
pleasant bronzed face which I knew that I had seem somewhere
before. I noticed on his sleeve the crown and star of a
lieutenant-colonel. He said pleasantly:

"You're Major Meredyth, aren't you?"

"Yes," said I.

"You don't remember me. No reason why you should. But my name's
Dacre--Reggie Dacre, brother of Johnnie Dacre in your battery. We
met in Cape Town."

I held out my hand.

"Of course," said I. "You took me to a hospital. Do sit down for a
bit. You a member here?"

"No. I belong to the Naval and Military. Lunching with old General
Donovan, a sort of god-father of mine. He told me who you were. I
haven't seen you since that day in South Africa."

I asked for news of Johnnie, who had been lost to my ken for
years. Johnnie had been in India, and was now doing splendidly
with his battery somewhere near La Bassee. I pointed to the sling.
Badly hurt? No, a bit of flesh torn by shrapnel. Bone, thank God,
not touched. It was only horny-headed idiots like the British R.
A. M. C. that would send a man home for such a trifle. It was
devilish hard lines to be hoofed away from the regiment
practically just after he had got his command. However, he would
be back in a week or two. He laughed.

"Lucky to be alive at all."

"Or not done in for ever like myself," said I.

"I didn't like to ask--" he said. Men would rather die than commit
the indelicacy of appearing to notice my infirmity.

"You haven't been out there?"

"No such luck," said I. "I got this little lot about a fortnight
after I saw you. Johnnie was still on sick leave and so was out of
that scrap."

He commiserated with me on my ill-fortune, and handed me his
cigarette case. We smoked.

"You've been on my mind for months," he said abruptly.

"I?"

He nodded. "I thought I recognised you. I asked the General who
you were. He said 'Meredyth of the Gunners.' So I knew I was right
and made a bee line for you. Do you remember the story of that man
in the hospital?"

"Perfectly," said I.

"About Boyce of the King's Watch?"

"Yes," said I. "I saw Boyce, home on leave, about a fortnight ago.
I suppose you saw his D.S.O. gazetted?"

"I did. And he deserves a jolly sight more," he exclaimed
heartily. "I've come to the conclusion that that fellow in the
hospital--I forget the brute's name--"

"Somers," said I.

"Yes, Somers. I've come to the conclusion that he was the
damn'dest, filthiest, lyingest hound that ever was pupped."

"I'm glad to hear it," said I. "It was a horrible story. I
remember making your brother and yourself vow eternal secrecy."

"You can take it from me that we haven't breathed a word to
anybody. As a matter of fact, the whole damn thing had gone out of
my head for years. Then I begin to hear of a fellow called Boyce
of the Rifles doing the most crazy magnificent things. I make
enquiries and find it's the same Leonard Boyce of the Vilboek Farm
story. We're in the same Brigade.

"You don't often hear of individual men out there--your mind's too
jolly well concentrated on your own tiny show. But Boyce has sort
of burst out beyond his own regiment and, with just one or two
others, is beginning to be legendary. He has done the maddest
things and won the V.C. twenty times over. So that blighter
Somers, accusing him of cowardice, was a ghastly liar. And then I
remembered taking you up to hear that damnable slander, and I felt
that I had a share in it, as far as you were concerned, and I
longed to get at you somehow and tell you about it. I wanted to
get it off my chest. And now," said he with a breath of relief,
"thank God, I've been able to do so."

"I wish you would tell me of an incident or two," said I.

"He has got a life-preserver that looks like an ordinary cane--had
it specially made. It's quite famous. Men tell me that the knob is
a rich, deep, polished vermilion. He'll take on any number of
Boches with it single-handed. If there's any sign of wire-cutting,
he'll not let the men fire, but will take it on himself, and creep
like a Gurkha and do the devils in. One night he got a whole
listening post like that. He does a lot of things a second in
command hasn't any business to do, but his men would follow him
anywhere. He bears a charmed life. I could tell you lots of
things--but I see my old General's getting restive." He rose,
stretched out his hand. "At any rate, take my word for it--if
there's a man in the British Army who doesn't know what fear is,
that man is Leonard Boyce."

He nodded in his frank way and rejoined his old General. As I had
had enough exciting information for one visit to town, I motored
back to Wellingsford.





CHAPTER VIII


My house, as I have already mentioned, is situated at the extreme
end of the town on the main road, already called the Rowdon Road,
which is an extension of the High Street. It stands a little way
back to allow room for a semicircular drive, at each end of which
is a broad gate. The semicircle encloses a smooth-shaven lawn of
which I am vastly proud. In the spandrels by the side of the house
are laburnums and lilacs and laurels. From gate to gate stretch
iron railings, planted in a low stone parapet and unencumbered
with vegetation, so that the view from road to lawn and from lawn
to road is unrestricted. Thus I can take up my position on my lawn
near the railings and greet all passers-by.

It was a lovely May morning. My laburnums and lilacs were in
flower. On the other side of the way the hedge of white-thorn
screening the grounds of a large preparatory school was in flower
also, and deliciously scented the air. I sat in my accustomed
spot, a table with writing materials, tobacco, and books by my
side, and a mass of newspapers at my feet. There was going to be a
coalition Government. Great statesmen were going to forget that
there was such a thing as party politics, except in the
distribution of minor offices, when the claims of good and
faithful jackals on either side would have to be considered. And
my heart grew sick within me, and I longed for a Man to arise who,
with a snap of his strong fingers, would snuff out the Little
Parish-Pump Folk who have misruled England this many a year with
their limited vision and sordid aspirations, and would take the
great, unshakable, triumphant command of a mighty Empire
passionately yearning to do his bidding... I could read no more
newspapers. They disgusted me. One faction seemed doggedly opposed
to any proposition for the amelioration of the present disastrous
state of affairs. The salvation of wrecked political theories
loomed far more important in their darkened minds than the
salvation, by hook or crook, of the British Empire. The other
faction, more patriotic in theory, cried aloud stinking fish, and
by scurrilous over-statement defeated their own ends. In the
general ignoble screech the pronouncements of the one or two
dignified and thoughtful London newspapers passed unheeded....

I drew what comfort I could from the sight of the continually
passing troops; a platoon off to musketry training; a battalion,
brown and dusty, on a route march with full equipment, whistling
"Tipperary"; sections of an Army Service train cursing good-
humouredly at their mules; a battery of artillery thundering along
at a clean, rhythmical trot which, considering what they were like
in their slovenly jogging and bumping three months ago, afforded
me prodigious pleasure. On the passing of these last-mentioned I
felt inclined to clap my hands and generally proclaim my
appreciation. Indeed, I did arrest a fresh-faced subaltern
bringing up the rear of the battery who, having acquaintance with
me, saluted, and I shouted:

"They're magnificent!"

He reared up his horse and flushed with pleasure.

"We've done our best, sir," said he. "We had news last week that
we should be sent out quite soon, and that has bucked them up
enormously."

He saluted again and rode off, and my heart went with him. What a
joy it would be to clatter down a road once again with the guns!

And other people passed. Townsfolk who gave me a kindly "Morning,
Major!" and went on, and others who paused awhile and gave me the
gossip of the day. And presently young Randall Holmes went by on a
motor bicycle. He caught sight of me, disappeared, and then
suddenly reappeared, wheeling his machine. He rested it by the
kerb of the sidewalk and approached the railings. He was within a
yard of me.

"Would you let me speak to you for half a minute, Major?"

"Certainly," said I. "Come in."

He swung through the gate and crossed the lawn.

"You said very hard things to me some time ago."

"I did," said I, "and I don't think they were undeserved."

"Up to a certain point I agree with you," he replied.

He looked extraordinarily robust and athletic in his canvas kit.
Why should he be tearing about aimlessly on a motor bicycle this
May morning when he ought to be in France?

"I wish you agreed with me all along the line," said I.

He found a little iron garden seat and sat down by my side.

"I don't want to enter into controversial questions," he said.

Confound him! He might have been fifty instead of four-and-twenty.
Controversial questions! His assured young Oxford voice irritated
me.

"What do you want to enter into?" I asked.

"A question of honour," he answered calmly. "I have been wanting
to speak to you, but I didn't like to. Passing you by, just now, I
made a sudden resolution. You have thought badly of me on account
of my attitude towards Phyllis Gedge. I want to tell you that you
were quite right. My attitude was illogical and absurd."

"You have discovered," said I, "that she is not the inspiration
you thought she was, and like an honest man have decided to let
her alone."

"On the contrary," said he. "I'd give the eyes out of my head to
marry her."

"Why?"

He met my gaze very frankly. "For the simple reason, Major
Meredyth, that I love her."

All this natural, matter-of-fact simplicity coming from so
artificial a product of Balliol as Randall Holmes, was a bit
upsetting. After a pause, I said:

"If that is so, why don't you marry her?"

"She'll have nothing to do with me."

"Have you asked her?"

"I have, in writing. There's no mistake about it. I'm in earnest."

"I'm exceedingly glad to hear it," said I.

And I was. An honest lover I can understand, and a Don Juan I can
understand. But the tepid philanderer has always made my toes
tingle. And I was glad, too, to hear that little Phyllis Gedge had
so much dignity and commonsense. Not many small builders'
daughters would have sent packing a brilliant young gentleman like
Randall Holmes, especially if they happened to be in love with
him. As I did not particularly wish to be the confidant of this
love-lorn shepherd, I said nothing more. Randall lit a cigarette.

"I hope I'm not boring you," he said.

"Not a bit."

"Well--what complicates the matter is that her father's the most
infernal swine unhung." I started, remembering what Betty had told
me.

"I thought," said I, "that you were fast friends."

"Who told you so?" he asked.

"All the birds of Wellingsford."

"I did go to see him now and then," he admitted. "I thought he was
much maligned. A man with sincere opinions, even though they're
wrong, is deserving of some respect, especially when the
expression of them involves considerable courage and sacrifice. I
wanted to get to the bottom of his point of view."

"If you used such a metaphor in the Albemarle," I interrupted,
"I'm afraid you would be sacrificed by your friends."

He had the grace to laugh. "You know what I mean."

"And did you get to the bottom of it?"

"I think so."

"And what did you find?"

"Crass ignorance and malevolent hatred of everyone better born,
better educated, better off, better dressed, better spoken than
himself."

"Still," said I, "a human being can have those disabilities and
yet not deserve to be qualified as the most infernal swine
unhung."

"That's a different matter," said he, unbuttoning his canvas
jacket, for the morning was warm. "I can talk patiently to a fool
--to be able to do so is an elementary equipment for a life among
men and women--" Why the deuce, thought I, wasn't he expending
this precious acquirement on a platoon of agricultural recruits?
The officer who suffers such gladly has his name inscribed on the
Golden Legend (unfortunately unpublished) of the British Army--
"but when it comes," he went on, "to low-down lying knavery, then
I'm done. I don't know how to tackle it. All I can do is to get
out of the knave's way. I've found Gedge to be a beast, and I'm
very honourably in love with Gedge's daughter, and I've asked her
to marry me. I attach some value, Major, to your opinion of me,
and I want you, to know these two facts."

I again expressed my gratification at learning his honourable
intentions towards Phyllis, and I commended his discovery of
Gedge's fundamental turpitude. I cannot say that I was cordial. At
this period, the unmilitary youth of England were not
affectionately coddled by their friends. Still, I was curious to
see whether Gedge's depravity extended beyond a purely political
scope. I questioned my young visitor.

"Oh, it's nothing to do with abstract opinions," said he, thinning
away the butt-end of his cigarette. "And nothing to do with
treason, or anything of that kind. He has got hold of a horrible
story--told me all about it when he was foully drunk--that in
itself would have made me break with him, for I loathe drunken
men--and gloats over the fact that he is holding it over
somebody's head. Oh, a ghastly story!"

I bent my brows on him. "Anything to do with South Africa?"

"South Africa--? No. Why?"

The puzzled look on his face showed that I was entirely on the
wrong track. I was disappointed at the faultiness of my acumen.
You see, I argued thus: Gedge goes off on a mysterious jaunt with
Boyce. Boyce retreats precipitately to London. Gedge in his cups
tells a horrible scandal with a suggestion of blackmail to Randall
Holmes. What else could he have divulged save the Vilboek Farm
affair? My nimble wit had led me a Jack o' Lantern dance to
nowhere.

"Why South Africa?" he repeated.

I replied with Macchiavellian astuteness, so as to put him on a
false scent: "A stupid slander about illicit diamond buying in
connection with a man, now dead, who used to live here some years
ago."

"Oh, no," said Randall, with a superior smile "Nothing of that
sort."

"Well, what is it?" I asked.

He helped himself to another cigarette. "That," said he, "I can't
tell you. In the first place I gave my word of honour as to
secrecy before he told me, and, in the next, even if I hadn't
given my word, I would not be a party to such a slander by
repeating it to any living man." He bent forward and looked me
straight in the eyes. "Even to you, Major, who have been a second
father to me."

"A man," said I, "has a priceless possession that he should always
keep--his own counsel."

"I've only told you as much as I have done," said Randall,
"because I want to make clear to you my position with regard both
to Phyllis and her father."

"May I ask," said I, "what is Phyllis's attitude towards her
father?" I knew well enough from Betty; but I wanted to see how
much Randall knew about it.

"She is so much out of sympathy with his opinions that she has
gone to live at the hospital."

"Perhaps she thinks you share those opinions, and for that reason
won't marry you?"

"That may have something to do with it, although I have done my
best to convince her that I hold diametrically opposite views, But
you can't expect a woman to reason."

"The unexpected sometimes happens," I remarked. "And then comes
catastrophe; in this case not to the woman." I cannot say that my
tone was sympathetic. I had cause for interest in his artless
tale, but it was cold and dispassionate. "Tell me," I continued,
"when did you discover the diabolical nature of the man Gedge?"

"Last night."

"And when did you ask Phyllis to marry you?"

"A week ago."

"What's going to happen now?" I asked.

"I'm hanged if I know," said he, gloomily.

I was in no mood to offer the young man any advice. The poor
little wretch at the hospital--so Betty had told me--was crying
her eyes out for him; but it was not for his soul's good that he
should know it.

"In heroic days," said I, "a hopeless lover always found a
sovereign remedy against an obdurate mistress."

He rose and buttoned up his canvas jacket.

"I know what you mean," he said. "And I didn't come to discuss it
--if you'll excuse my apparent rudeness in saying so."

"Then things are as they were between us."

"Not quite, I hope," he replied in a dignified way. "When last you
spoke to me about Phyllis Gedge, I really didn't know my own mind.
I am not a cad and the thought of--of anything wrong never entered
my head. On the other hand, marriage seemed out of the question."

"I remember," said I, "you talked some blithering rot about her
being a symbol."

"I am quite willing to confess I was a fool," he admitted
gracefully. "And I merited your strictures."

His reversion to artificiality annoyed me. I'm far from being of
an angelic disposition.

"My dear boy," I cried. "Do, for God's sake, talk human English,
and not the New Oxford Dictionary."

He flushed angrily, snapped an impatient finger and thumb, and
marched away to the gravel path. I sang out sharply:

"Randall!"

He turned. I cried:

"Come here at once."

He came with sullen reluctance. Afterwards I was rather tickled at
realizing that the lame old war-dog had so much authority left. If
he had gone defiantly off, I should have felt rather a fool.

"My dear boy," I said, "I didn't mean to insult you. But can't a
clever fellow like you understand that all the pretty frills and
preciousness of a year ago are as dead as last year's Brussels
sprouts? We're up against elemental things and can only get at
them with elemental ideas expressed in elemental language."

"I'd have you to know," said Randall, "that I spoke classical
English."

"Quite so," said I. "But the men of to-day speak Saxon English,
Cockney English, slang English, any damned sort of English that is
virile and spontaneous. As I say, you're a clever fellow. Can't
you see my point? Speech is an index of mental attitude. I bet you
what you like Phyllis Gedge would see it at once. Just imagine a
subaltern at the front after a bad quarter of an hour with his
Colonel--'I've merited your strictures, sir!' If there was a bomb
handy, the Colonel would catch it up and slay him on the spot."

"But I don't happen to be at the front, Major," said Randall.

"Then you damned well ought to be," said I, in sudden wrath.

I couldn't help it. He asked for it. He got it.

He went away, mounted his motor bicycle, and rode off.

I was sorry. The boy evidently was in a chastened mood. If I had
handled him gently and diplomatically, I might have done something
with him. I suppose I'm an irritable, nasty-tempered beast. It is
easy to lay the blame on my helpless legs. It isn't my legs. I've
conquered my damned legs. It isn't my legs. Its ME.

I was ashamed of myself. And when, later, Marigold enquired
whether the doors were still shut against Mr. Holmes, I asked him
what the blazes he meant by not minding his own business. And
Marigold said: "Very good, sir."





CHAPTER IX


For a week or two the sluggish stream of Wellingsfordian life
flowed on undisturbed. The chief incident was a recruiting meeting
held on the Common. Sir Anthony Fenimore in his civic capacity, a
staff-officer with red tabs, a wounded soldier, an elderly,
eloquent gentleman from recruiting headquarters in London, and one
or two nondescripts, including myself, were on the platform. A
company of a County Territorial Battalion and the O.T.C. of the
Godbury Grammar School gave a semblance of military display. The
Town Band, in a sort of Hungarian uniform, discoursed martial
music. Old men and maidens, mothers and children, and contented
young fellows in khaki belonging to all kinds of arms, formed a
most respectable crowd. The flower of Wellingsfordian youth was
noticeably absent. They were having too excellent a time to be
drawn into the temptation of a recruiting meeting, in spite of the
band and the fine afternoon and the promiscuity of attractive
damsels. They were making unheard-of money at the circumjacent
factories; their mothers were waxing fat on billeting-money. They
never had so much money to spend on moving-picture-palaces and
cheap jewellery for their inamoratas in their lives. As our
beautiful Educational system had most scrupulously excluded from
their school curriculum any reference to patriotism, any
rudimentary conception of England as their sacred heritage, and as
they had been afforded no opportunity since they left school of
thinking of anything save their material welfare and grosser
material appetites, the vague talk of peril to the British Empire
left them unmoved. They were quite content to let others go and
fight. They had their own comfortable theories about it. Some
fellows liked that sort of thing. They themselves didn't. In
ordinary times, it amused that kind of fellow to belong to a
Harriers Club, and clad in shorts and zephyrs, go on Sundays for
twenty-mile runs. It didn't amuse them. A cigarette, a girl, and a
stile formed their ideal of Sunday enjoyment. They had no quarrel
with the harrier fellow or the soldier fellow for following his
bent. They were most broad-minded. But they flattered themselves
that they were fellows of a superior and more intelligent breed.
They were making money and living warm, the only ideal of
existence of which they had ever heard, and what did anything else
matter?

If a man has never been taught that he has a country, how the
deuce do you expect him to love her--still less to defend her with
his blood? Our more than damnable governments for the last thirty
years have done everything in their power to crush in English
hearts the national spirit of England. God knows I have no quarrel
with Scotland, Ireland, and Wales. I speak in no disparagement of
them. Quite the reverse. In this war they have given freely of
their blood. I only speak as an Englishman of England, the great
Mother of the Empire. Scot, Irishman, Welshman, Canadian,
Australian are filled with the pride of their nationality. It is
part of their being. Wisely they have been trained to it from
infancy. England, who is far bigger, far more powerful than the
whole lot of them put together--it's a statistical fact--has
deliberately sunk herself in her own esteem, in her own pride.
Only one great man has stood for England, as England, the great
Mother, for the last thirty years. And that man is Rudyard
Kipling. And the Little Folk in authority in England have spent
their souls in rendering nugatory his inspired message.

This criminal self-effacement of England is at the root of the
peril of the British Empire during this war.

I told you at the beginning that I did not know how to write a
story. You must forgive me for being led away into divagations
which seem to be irrelevant to the dramatic sequence. But when I
remember that the result of all the pomp and circumstance of that
meeting was seven recruits, of whom three were rejected as being
physically unfit, my pen runs away with my discretion, and my
conjecturing as to artistic fitness.

Yes, the Major spoke. Sir Anthony is a peppery little person and
the audience enjoyed the cayenne piquancy of his remarks. The red-
tabbed Lieutenant-Colonel spoke. He was a bit dull. The elderly
orator from London roused enthusiastic cheers. The wounded
sergeant, on crutches, displaying a foot like a bandaged mop,
brought tears into the eyes of many women and evoked hoarse cheers
from the old men. I spoke from my infernal chair, and I think I
was quite a success with the good fellows in khaki. But the only
men we wanted to appeal to had studiously refrained from being
present. The whole affair was a fiasco.

When we got home, Marigold, who had stood behind my chair during
the proceedings, said to me:

"I think I know personally about thirty slackers in this town,
sir, and I'm more than a match for any three of them put together.
Suppose I was to go the rounds, so to speak, and say to each of
them, 'You young blighter, if you don't come with me and enlist, I
'll knock hell out of you!'--and, if he didn't come, I did knock
hell out of him--what exactly would happen, sir?"

"You would be summoned," said I, "for thirty separate cases of
assault and battery. Reckoning the penalty at six months each, you
would have to go to prison for fifteen years."

Marigold's one eye grew pensive and sad.

"And they call this," said he, "a free country!"

I began this chapter by remarking that for a week or two after my
second interview with Randall Holmes, nothing particular happened.
Then one afternoon came Sir Anthony Fenimore to see me, and with a
view to obtaining either my advice or my sympathy, reopened the
story of his daughter Althea found drowned in the canal eleven
months before.

What he considered a most disconcerting light had just been cast
on the tragedy by Maria Beccles. This lady was Lady Fenimore's
sister. A deadly feud, entirely of Miss Beccles' initiating and
nourishing, had existed between them for years. They had been
neither on speaking nor on writing terms. Miss Beccles, ten years
Lady Fenimore's senior, was, from all I had heard, a most
disagreeable and ill-conditioned person, as different from my
charming friend Edith Fenimore as the ugly old sisters were from
Cinderella. Although she belonged to a good old South of England
family, she had joined, for reasons known only to herself, the old
Free Kirk of Scotland, found a congenial Calvinistic centre in
Galloway, and after insulting her English relations and friends in
the most unconscionable way, cut herself adrift from them for
ever. "Mad as a hatter," Sir Anthony used to say, and, never
having met the lady, I agreed with him. She loathed her sister,
she detested Anthony, and she appeared to be coldly indifferent to
the fact of the existence of her nephew Oswald. But for Althea,
and for Althea alone, she entertained a curious, indulgent
affection, and every now and then Althea went to spend a week or
so in Galloway, where she contrived to obtain considerable
amusement. Aunt Maria did both herself and her visitors very well,
said Althea, who had an appreciative eye for the material
blessings of life. Althea walked over the moors and fished and
took Aunt Maria's cars out for exercise and, except whistle on the
Sabbath, seemed to do exactly what she liked.

Now, in January 1914, Althea announced to her parents that Aunt
Maria had summoned her for a week to Galloway. Sir Anthony stuffed
her handbag with five-pound notes, and at an early hour of the
morning sent her up in the car to London in charge of the
chauffeur. The chauffeur returned saying that he had bought Miss
Althea's ticket at Euston and seen her start off comfortably on
her journey. A letter or two had been received by the Fenimores
from Galloway, and letters they had written to Galloway had been
acknowledged by Althea. She returned to Wellingsford in due
course, with bonny cheeks and wind-swept eyes, and told us all
funny little stories about Aunt Maria. No one thought anything
more about it until one fine afternoon in May, 1915, when Maria
Beccles walked unexpectedly into the drawing-room of Wellings
Park, while Sir Anthony and Lady Fenimore were at tea.

"My dear Edith," she said to her astounded hostess, who had not
seen her for fifteen years. "In this orgy of hatred and strife
that is going on in the world, it seems ridiculous to go on hating
and fighting one's own family. We must combine against the Germans
and hate them. Let us be friends."

"Mad as Crazy Jane," said Sir Anthony, telling me the story. But
I, who had never heard Aunt Maria's side of the dispute, thought
it very high-spirited of the old lady to come and hold out the
olive-branch in so uncompromising a fashion.

Lady Fenimore then said that she had never wished to quarrel with
Maria, and Sir Anthony declared that her patriotic sentiments did
her credit, and that he was proud to receive her under his roof,
and in a few minutes Maria was drinking tea and discussing the war
in the most contented way in the world.

"I didn't write to you on the occasion of the death of your two
children because you knew I didn't like you," said this outspoken
lady. "I hate hypocrisy. Also I thought that tribulation might
chasten you in the eyes of the Lord. I've discussed it with our
Minister, a poor body, but a courageous man. He told me I was
unchristian. Now, what with all this universal massacre going on
and my unregenerate longing, old woman as I am, to wade knee-deep
in German blood, I don't know what the devil I am."

The more Anthony told me of Aunt Maria, the more I liked her.

"Can't I come round and make her acquaintance?" I cried. "She's
the sort of knotty, solid human thing that I should love. No
wonder Althea was fond of her."

"This happened a week ago. She only stayed a night," replied Sir
Anthony. "I wish to God we had never seen her or heard of her."

And then the good, heart-wrung little man, who had been beating
about the bush for half an hour, came straight to the point.

"You remember Althea's visit to Scotland in January last year?"

"Perfectly," said I.

He rose from his chair and looked at me in wrinkled anguish.

"She never went there," he said.

That was what he had come to tell me. A natural reference to the
last visit of Althea to her aunt had established the stupefying
fact.

"Althea's last visit was in October, 1913," said Miss Beccles.

"But we have letters from your house to prove she was with you in
January," said Sir Anthony.

Most methodical and correspondence-docketing of men, he went to
his library and returned with a couple of letters.

The old lady looked them through grimly.

"Pretty vague. No details. Read 'em again, Anthony."

When he had done so, she said: "Well?"

Lady Fenimore objected: "But Althea did stay with you. She must
have stayed with you."

"All right, Edith," said Maria, sitting bolt upright. "Call me a
liar, and have done with it. I've come here at considerable
dislocation of myself and my principles, to bury the hatchet for
the sake of unity against the enemy, and this is how I'm treated.
I can only go back to Scotland at once."

Sir Anthony succeeded in pacifying her. The letters were evidence
that Edith and himself believed that Althea was in Galloway at the
time. Maria's denial had come upon them like a thunderclap,
bewildering, stunning. If Althea was not in Galloway, where was
she?

Maria Beccles did not reply for some time to the question. Then
she took the pins out of her hat and threw it on a chair, thus
symbolising the renunciation of her intention of returning
forthwith to Scotland.

"Yes, Maria," said Lady Fenimore, with fear in her dark eyes, "we
don't doubt your word--but, as Anthony has said, if she wasn't
with you, where was she?"

"How do I know?"

Maria Beccles pointed a lean finger--she was a dark and
shrivelled, gipsy-like creature. "You might as well ask the canal
in which she drowned herself."

"But, my God, Anthony!" I cried, when he had got thus far, "What
did you think? What did you say?"

I realised that the old lady had her social disqualifications.
Plain-dealing is undoubtedly a virtue. But there are several
virtues which the better class of angel keeps chained up in a dog-
kennel. Of course she was acute. A mind trained in the acrobatics
of Calvinistic Theology is, within a narrow compass, surprisingly
agile. It jumped at one bound from the missing week in Althea's
life into the black water of the canal. It was incapable, however,
of appreciating the awful horror in the minds of the beholders.

"I don't know what I said," replied Sir Anthony, walking
restlessly about my library. "We were struck all of a heap. As you
know, we never had reason to think that the poor dear child's
death was anything but an accident. We were not narrow-minded old
idiots. She was a dear good girl. In a modern way she claimed her
little independence. We let her have it. We trusted her. We took
it for granted--you know it, Duncan, as well as I do--that, a hot
night in June--not able to sleep--she had stuck on a hat and
wandered about the grounds, as she had often done before, and a
spirit of childish adventure had tempted her, that night, to walk
round the back of the town and--and--well, until in the dark, she
stepped off the tow-path by the lock gates, into nothing--and
found the canal. It was an accident," he continued, with a hand on
my shoulder, looking down on me in my chair. "The inquest proved
that. I accepted it, as you know, as a visitation of God. Edith
and I sorrowed for her like cowards. It took the war to bring us
to our senses. But, now, this damned old woman comes and upsets
the whole thing."

"But," said I, "after all, it was only a bow at a venture on the
part of the old lady."

"I wish it were," said he, and he handed me a letter which Maria
had written to him the day after her return to Scotland.

The letter contained a pretty piece of information. She had
summarily discharged Elspeth Macrae, her confidential maid of
five-and-twenty years' standing. Elspeth Macrae, on her own
confession, had, out of love for Althea, performed the time-
honoured jugglery with correspondence. She had posted in Galloway
letters which she had received, under cover, from Althea, and had
forwarded letters that had arrived addressed to Althea to an
accommodation address in Carlisle. So have sentimental serving-
maids done since the world began.

"What do you make of it?" asked Sir Anthony.

What else could I make of it but the one sorry theory? What woman
employs all this subterfuge in order to obtain a weeks liberty for
any other purpose than the one elementary purpose of young
humanity?

We read the inevitable conclusion in each other's eyes.

"Who is the man, Duncan?"

"I suppose you have searched her desk and things?"

"Last year. Everything most carefully. It was awful--but we had
to. Not a scrap of paper that wasn't innocence itself."

"It can't be anyone here," said I. "You know what the place is.
The slightest spark sends gossip aflame like the fumes of petrol."

He sat down by my side and rubbed his close-cropped grey head.

"It couldn't have been young Holmes?"

The little man had a brave directness that sometimes disconcerted
me. I knew the ghastly stab that every word cost him.

"She used to make mock of Randall," said I. "Don't you remember
she used to call him 'the gilded poet'? Once she said he was the
most lady-like young man of her acquaintance. I don't admire our
young friend, but I think you're on the wrong track, Anthony."

"I don't see it," said he. "That sort of flippancy goes for
nothing. Women use it as a sort of quickset hedge of protection."
He bent forward and tapped me on my senseless knee. "Young Holmes
always used to be in and out of the house. They had known each
other from childhood. He had a distinguished Oxford career. When
he won the Newdigate, she came running to me with the news, as
pleased as Punch. I gave him a dinner in honour of it, if you
remember."

"I remember," said I.

I did not remind him that he had made a speech which sent cold
shivers down the spine of our young Apollo; that, in a fine
rhetorical flourish--dear old fox-hunting ignoramus--he declared
that the winner of the Newdigate carried the bays of the Laureate
in his knapsack; that Randall, white-lipped with horror, murmured
to Betty Fairfax, his neighbour at the table: "My God! The Poet-
Laureate's unhallowed grave! I must burn the knapsack and take to
a hod!" It was too tragical a conversation for light allusion.

"The poor dear child--Edith and I have sized it up--was all over
him that evening."

"What more youthfully natural," said I, "than that she should
carry off the hero of the occasion--her childhood's playfellow?"

"All sorts of apparently insignificant details, Duncan, taken
together--especially if they fit in--very often make up a whole
case for prosecution."

"You're a Chairman of Quarter Sessions," I admitted, "and so you
ought to know."

"I know this," said he, "that Holmes only spent part of that
Christmas vacation with his mother, and went off somewhere or the
other early in January." I cudgelled back my memory into
confirmation of his statement. To remember trivial incidents
before the war takes a lot of cudgelling. Yes. I distinctly
recollected the young man's telling me that Oxford being an
intellectual hothouse and Wellingsford an intellectual Arabia
Petrea, he was compelled, for the sake of his mental health, to
find a period of repose in the intellectual Nature of London. I
mentioned this to Sir Anthony.

"Yet," I said, "I don't think he had anything to do with it."

"Why?"

"It would have been far too much moral exertion--"

"You call it moral?" Sir Anthony burst out angrily.

I pacified him with an analysis, from my point of view, of
Randall's character. Centripetal forces were too strong for the
young man. I dissertated on his amours with Phyllis Gedge.

"No, my dear old friend," said I, in conclusion, "I don't think it
was Randall Holmes."

Sir Anthony rose and shook his fist in my face. As I knew he meant
me no bodily harm, I did not blench.

"Who was it, then?"

"Althea," said I, "often used to stay in town with your sister.
Lady Greatorex has a wide circle of acquaintances. Do you know
anything of the men Althea used to meet at her house?"

"Of course I don't," replied Sir Anthony. Then he sat down again
with a gesture of despair. "After all, what does it matter?
Perhaps it's as well I don't know who the man was, for if I did,
I'd kill him!"

He set his teeth and glowered at nothing and smote his left palm
with his right fist, and there was a long silence. Presently he
repeated:

"I'd kill him!"

We fell to discussing the whole matter over again. Why, I asked,
should we assume that the poor child was led astray by a villain?
Might there not have been a romantic marriage which, for some
reason we could not guess, she desired to keep secret for a tune?
Had she not been bright and happy from January to June? And that
night of tragedy... What more likely than that she had gone forth
to keep tryst with her husband and accidentally met her death? "He
arrives," said I, "waits for her. She never comes. He goes away.
The next day he learns from local gossip or from newspapers what
has happened. He thinks it best to keep silent and let her fair
name be untouched...What have you to say against that theory?"

"Possible," he replied. "Anything conceivable within the limits of
physical possibility is possible. But it isn't probable. I have an
intuitive feeling that there was villainy about--and if ever I get
hold of that man--God help him!"

So there was nothing more to be said.





CHAPTER X


I haven't that universal sympathy which is the most irritating
attribute of saints and other pacifists. When, for instance,
anyone of the fraternity arguing from the Sermon on the Mount
tells me that I ought to love Germans, either I admit the
obligation and declare that, as I am a miserable sinner, I have no
compunction in breaking it, or, if he is a very sanctimonious
saint, I remind him that, such creatures as modern Germans not
having been invented on or about the year A.D. 30, the rule about
loving your enemies could not possibly apply. At least I imagine I
do one of these two things (sometimes, indeed, I dream gloatfully
over acts of physical violence) when I read the pronouncements of
such a person; for I have to my great good fortune never met him
in the flesh. If there are any saintly pacifists in Wellingsford,
they keep sedulously out of my way, and they certainly do not
haunt my Service Club. And these are the only two places in which
I have my being. Even Gedge doesn't talk of loving Germans. He
just lumps all the belligerents together in one conglomerate
hatred, for upsetting his comfortable social scheme.

As I say, I lack the universal sympathy of the saint. I can't like
people I don't like. Some people I love very deeply; others, being
of a kindly disposition, I tolerate; others again I simply detest.
Now Wellingsford, like every little country town in England, is
drab with elderly gentlewomen. As I am a funny old tabby myself, I
have to mix with them. If I refuse invitations to take tea with
them, they invite themselves to tea with me. "The poor Major,"
they say, "is so lonely." And they bait their little hooks and
angle for gossip of which I am supposed--Heaven knows why--to be a
sort of stocked pond. They don't carry home much of a catch, I
assure you.... Well, of some of them I am quite fond. Mrs. Boyce,
for all her shortcomings, is an old crony for whom I entertain a
sincere affection. Towards Betty's aunt, Miss Fairfax, a harmless
lady with a passion for ecclesiastical embroidery, I maintain an
attitude of benevolent neutrality. But Mrs. Holmes, Randall's
mother, and her sisters, the daughters of an eminent publicist who
seems to have reared his eminence on bones of talk flung at him by
Carlisle, George Eliot, Lewes, Monckton Milnes, and is now,
doubtless, recording their toe-prints on the banks of Acheron, I
never could and never can abide. My angel of a wife saw good in
them, and she loved the tiny Randall, of whom I too was fond; so,
for her sake, I always treated them with courtesy and kindness.
Also for Randall's father's sake. He was a bluff, honest, stock-
broking Briton who fancied pigeons and bred greyhounds for
coursing, and cared less for literature and art than does the
equally honest Mrs. Marigold in my kitchen. But his wife and her
sisters led what they called the intellectual life. They regarded
it as a heritage from their pompous ass of a father. Of course
they were not eighteen-sixty, or even eighteen-eighty. They prided
themselves on developing the hereditary tradition of culture to
its extreme modern expression. They were of the semi-intellectual
type of idiot--and, if it destroys it, the great war will have
some justification--which professes to find in the dull analysis
of the drab adultery and suicide of a German or Scandinavian
rabbit-picker a supreme expression of human existence. All their
talk was of Hauptmann and Sudermann (they dropped them
patriotically, I must say, as outrageous fellows, on the outbreak
of war), Strindberg, Dostoievsky--though I found they had never
read either "Crime and Punishment" or "The Brothers Karamazaroff"
--Tolstoi, whom they didn't understand; and in art--God save the
mark!--the Cubist school. That is how my poor young friend,
Randall, was trained to get the worst of the frothy scum of
intelligent Oxford. But even he sometimes winced at the
pretentiousness of his mother and his aunts. He was a clever
fellow and his knowledge was based on sound foundations. I need
not say that the ladies were rather feared than loved in
Wellingsford.

All this to explain why it was that when Marigold woke me from an
afternoon nap with the information that Mrs. Holmes desired to see
me, I scowled on him.

"Why didn't you say I was dead?"

"I told Mrs. Holmes you were asleep, sir, and she said: 'Will you
be so kind as to wake him?' So what could I do, sir?"

I have never met with an idiot so helpless in the presence of a
woman. He would have defended my slumbers before a charge of
cavalry; but one elderly lady shoo'd him aside like a chicken.

Mrs. Holmes was shewn in, a tall, dark, thin, nervous woman
wearing pince-nez and an austere sad-coloured garment.

She apologised for disturbing me.

"But," she said, sitting down on the couch, "I am in such great
trouble and I could think of no one but you to advise me." "What's
the matter?" I asked.

"It's Randall. He left the house the day before yesterday, without
telling any of us good-bye, and he hasn't written, and I don't
know what on earth has become of him."

"Did he take any luggage?"

"Just a small suit-case. He even packed it himself, a thing he has
never done at home in his life before."

This was news. The proceedings were unlike Randall, who in his
goings and comings loved the domestic brass-band. To leave his
home without valedictory music and vanish into the unknown,
betokened some unusual perturbation of mind.

I asked whether she knew of any reason for such perturbation.

"He was greatly upset," she replied, "by the stoppage of The
Albemarle Review for which he did such fine work."

I strove politely to hide my inability to condole and wagged my
head sadly:

"I'm afraid there was no room for it in a be-bombed and be-
shrapnelled world."

"I suppose the still small voice of reason would not be heard amid
the din," she sighed. "And no other papers--except the impossible
ones--would print Randall's poems and articles."

More news. This time excellent news. A publicist denied publicity
is as useful as a German Field Marshal on a desert island. I asked
what The Albemarle died of.

"Practically all the staff deserted what Randall called the Cause
and dribbled away into the army," she replied mournfully.

As to what this precious Cause meant I did not enquire, having no
wish to enter into an argument with the good lady which might have
become exacerbated. Besides, she would only have parroted Randall.
I had never yet detected her in the expression of an original
idea.

"Perhaps he has dribbled away too?" I suggested grimly. She was
silent. I bent forward. "Wouldn't you like him to dribble into the
great flood?"

She lifted her lean shoulders despairingly.

"He's the only son of a widow. Even in France and Germany they're
not expected to fight. But if he were different I would let him go
gladly--I'm not selfish and unpatriotic, Major," she said with an
unaccustomed little catch in her throat--and for the very first
time I found in her something sympathetic--"but," she continued,
"it seems so foolish to sacrifice all his intellectual brilliance
to such crudities as fighting, when it might be employed so much
more advantageously elsewhere."

"But, good God, my dear lady!" I cried. "Where are your wits?
Where's your education? Where's your intelligent understanding of
the daily papers? Where's your commonsense?"--I'm afraid I was
brutally rude. "Can't you give a minute's thought to the
situation? If there's one institution on earth that's shrieking
aloud for intellectual brilliance, it's the British Army! Do you
think it's a refuge for fools? Do you think any born imbecile is
good enough to outwit the German Headquarters Staff? Do you think
the lives of hundreds of his men--and perhaps the fate of
thousands--can be entrusted to any brainless ass? An officer can't
have too much brains. We're clamouring for brains. It's the
healthy, brilliant-brained men like Randall that the Army's
yelling for--simply yelling for," I repeated, bringing my hand
down on the arm of my chair.

Two little red spots showed on each side of her thin face.

"I've never looked at it in that light before," she admitted.

"Of course I agree with you," I said diplomatically, "that Randall
would be more or less wasted as a private soldier. The heroic
stuff of which Thomas Atkins is made is, thank God, illimitable.
But intellect is rare--especially in the ranks of God's own
chosen, the British officer. And Randall is of the kind we want as
officers. As for a commission, he could get one any day. I could
get one for him myself. I still have a few friends. He's a good-
looking chap and would carry off a uniform. Wouldn't you be proud
to see him?"

A tear rolled down her cheek. I patted myself on the back for an
artful fellow. But I had underrated her wit. To my chagrin she did
not fall into my trap.

"It's the uncertainty that's killing me," she said. And then she
burst out disconcertingly: "Do you think he has gone off with that
dreadful little Gedge girl?"

Phyllis! I was a myriad miles from Phyllis. I was talking about
real things. The mother, however, from her point of view, was
talking of real things also. But how did she come to know about
her son's amours? I thought it useless to enquire. Randall must
have advertised his passion pretty widely. I replied:

"It's extremely improbable. In the first place Phyllis Gedge isn't
dreadful, but a remarkably sweet and modest young woman, and in
the second place she won't have anything to do with him."

"That's nonsense," she said, bridling.

"Why?"

"Because--"

A gesture and a smile completed the sentence. That a common young
person should decline to have dealings with her paragon was
incredible.

"I can find out in a minute," I smiled, "whether she is still in
Wellingsford."

I wheeled myself to the telephone on my writing-table and rang up
Betty at the hospital.

"Do you know where Phyllis Gedge is?"

Betty's voice came. "Yes. She's here. I've just left her to come
to speak to you. Why do you want to know?"

"Never mind so long as she is safe and sound. There's no
likelihood of her running away or eloping?"

Betty's laughter rang over the wires. "What lunacy are you
talking? You might as well ask me whether I'm going to elope with
you."

"I don't think you're respectful, Betty," I replied. "Good-bye."

I rang off and reported Betty's side of the conversation to my
visitor.

"On that score," said I, "you can make your mind quite easy."

"But where can the boy have gone?" she cried.

"Into the world somewhere to learn wisdom," I said, and in order
to show that I did not speak ironically, I wheeled myself to her
side and touched her hand. "I think his swift brain has realised
at last that all his smart knowledge hasn't brought him a little
bit of wisdom worth a cent. I shouldn't worry. He's working out
his salvation somehow, although he may not know it."

"Do you really think so?"

"I do," said I. "And if he finds that the path of wisdom leads to
the German trenches--will you be glad or sorry?"

She grappled with the question in silence for a moment or two.
Then she broke down and, to my dismay, began to cry.

"Do you suppose there's a woman in England that, in her heart of
hearts, doesn't want her men folk to fight?"

I only allow the earlier part of this chapter to stand in order to
show how a man quite well-meaning, although a trifle irascible,
may be wanting in Christian charity and ordinary understanding;
and of how many tangled knots of human motive, impulse, and
emotion this war is a solvent. You see, she defended her son to
the last, adopting his own specious line of argument; but at the
last came the breaking-point. ...

The rest of our interview was of no great matter. I did my best to
reassure and comfort her; and when I next saw Marigold, I said
affably:

"You did quite well to wake me."

"I thought I was acting rightly, sir. Mr. Randall having bolted,
so to speak, it seemed only natural that Mrs. Holmes should come
to see you."

"You knew that Mr. Randall had bolted and you never told me?"

I glared indignantly. Marigold stiffened himself--the degree of
stiffness beyond his ordinary inflexibility of attitude could only
have been ascertained by a vernier, but that degree imparted an
appreciable dignity to his demeanour.

"I beg pardon, sir, but lately I've noticed that my little bits of
local news haven't seemed to be welcome."

"Marigold," said I, "don't be an ass."

"Very good, sir."

"My mind," said I, "is in an awful muddle about all sorts of
things that are going on in this town. So I should esteem it a
favour if you would tell me at once any odds and ends of gossip
you may pick up. They may possibly be important."

"And if I have any inferences to draw from what I hear," said he
gravely, fixing me with his clear eye, "may I take the liberty of
acquainting you with them?"

"Certainly."

"Very good, sir," said Marigold.

Now what was Marigold going to draw inferences about? That was
another puzzle. I felt myself being drawn into a fog-filled
labyrinth of intrigue in which already groping were most of the
people I knew. What with the mysterious relations between Betty
and Boyce and Gedge, what with young Dacre's full exoneration of
Boyce, what with young Randall's split with Gedge and his
impeccable attitude towards Phyllis, things were complicated
enough; Sir Anthony's revelations regarding poor Althea and his
dark surmises concerning Randall complicated them still more; and
now comes Mrs. Holmes to tell me of Randall's mysterious
disappearance.

"A plague on the whole lot!" I exclaimed wrathfully.

I dined that evening with the Fenimores. My dear Betty was there
too, the only other guest, looking very proud and radiant. A
letter that morning from Willie Connor informed her that the
regiment, by holding a trench against an overwhelming German
attack, had achieved glorious renown. The Brigadier-General had
specially congratulated the Colonel, and the Colonel had specially
complimented Willie on the magnificent work of his company. Of
course there was a heavy price in casualties--poor young
Etherington, whom we all knew, for instance, blown to atoms--but
Willie, thank God! was safe.

"I wonder what would happen to me, if Willie were to get the V.C.
I think I should go mad with pride!" she exclaimed with flushed
cheeks, forgetful of poor young Etherington, a laughter-loving boy
of twenty, who had been blown to atoms. It is strange how
apparently callous this universal carnage has made the noblest and
the tenderest of men and women. We cling passionately to the lives
of those near and dear to us. But as to those near and dear to
others, who are killed--well--we pay them the passing tribute not
even of a tear, but only of a sign. They died gloriously for their
country. What can we say more? If we--we survivors, not only
invalids and women and other stay-at-homes, but also comrades on
the field--were riven to our souls by the piteous tragedy of
splendid youth destroyed in its flower, we could not stand the
strain, we should weep hysterically, we should be broken folk. But
a merciful Providence steps in and steels our hearts. The loyal
hearts are there beating truly; and in order that they should beat
truly and stoutly, they are given this God-sent armour.

So, when we raised our glasses and drank gladly to the success of
Willie Connor the living, and put from our thoughts Frank
Etherington the dead, you must not account it to us as lack of
human pity. You must be lenient in your judgment of those who are
thrown into the furnace of a great war.

Lady Fenimore smiled on Betty. "We should all be proud, my dear,
if Captain Connor won the Victoria Cross. But you mustn't set your
heart on it. That would be foolish. Hundreds of thousands of men
deserve the V.C. ten times a day, and they can't all be rewarded."

Betty laughed gaily at good Lady Fenimore's somewhat didactic
reproof. "You know I'm not an absolute idiot. Fancy the poor dear
coming home all over bandages and sticking-plaster. 'Where's your
V. C?' 'I haven't got it.' 'Then go back at once and get it or I
shan't love you.' Poor darling!" Suddenly the laughter in her eyes
quickened into something very bright and beautiful. "There's not a
woman in England prouder of her husband than I am. No V.C. could
possibly reward him for what he has done. But I want it for
myself. I'd like my babies to cut their teeth on it.

When I went out to the Boer War, the most wonderful woman on earth
said to me on parting:

"Wherever you are, dear, remember that I am always with you in
spirit and soul and heart and almost in body."

And God knows she was. And when I returned a helpless cripple she
gathered me in her brave arms on the open quay at Southampton, and
after a moment or two of foolishness, she said:

"Do you know, when I die, what you'll find engraven on my heart?"

"No," said I.

"Your D.S.O. ribbon."

So when Betty talked about her babies and the little bronze cross,
my eyes grew moist and I felt ridiculously sentimental.

Not a word, of course, was spoken before Betty of the new light,
or the new darkness, whichsoever you will, that had been cast on
the tragedy of Althea. I could not do otherwise than agree with
the direct-spoken old lady who had at once correlated the
adventure in Carlisle with the plunge into the Wellingsford Canal.
And so did Sir Anthony. They were very brave, however, the little
man and Edith, in their dinner-talk with Betty. But I saw that the
past fortnight had aged them both by a year or more. They had been
stabbed in their honour, their trust, and their faith. It was a
secret terror that stalked at their side by day and lay stark at
their side by night. It was only when the ladies had left us that
Sir Anthony referred to the subject.

"I suppose you know that young Randall Holmes has bolted."

"So his mother informed me to-day."

He pricked his ears. "Does she know where he has gone to?"

"No," said I.

"What did I tell you?" said Sir Anthony.

I held up my glass of port to the light and looked through it.

"A lot of damfoolishness, my dear old friend," said I.

He grew angry. A man doesn't like to be coldly called a damfool at
his own table. He rose on his spurs, in his little red bantam way.
Was I too much of an idiot to see the connection? As soon as the
Carlisle business became known, this young scoundrel flies the
country. Couldn't I see an inch before my blind nose? Forbearing
to question this remarkable figure of speech, I asked him how so
confidential a matter could have become known.

"Everything gets known in this infernal little town," he retorted.

"That's where you're mistaken," said I. "Half everything gets
known--the unimportant half. The rest is supplied by malicious or
prejudiced invention."

We discussed the question after the futile way of men until we
went into the drawing-room, where Betty played and sang to us
until it was time to go home.

Marigold was about to lift me into the two-seater when Betty, who
had been lurking in her car a little way off, ran forward.

"Would it bore you if I came in for a quarter of an hour?"

"Bore me, my dear?" said I. "Of course not."

So a short while afterwards we were comfortably established in my
library.

"You rang me up to-day about Phyllis Gedge."

"I did," said I.

She lit a cigarette and seated herself on the fender-stool. She
has an unconscious knack of getting into easy, loose-limbed
attitudes. I said admiringly:

"Do you know you're a remarkably well-favoured young person?"

And as soon as I said it, I realised what a tremendous factor
Betty was in my circumscribed life. What could I do without her
sweet intimacy? If Willie Connor's Territorial regiment, like so
many others, had been ordered out to India, and she had gone with
him, how blank would be the days and weeks and months! I thanked
God for granting me her graciousness.

She smiled and blew me a kiss. "That's very gratifying to know,"
she said. "But it has nothing to do with Phyllis."

"Well, what about Phyllis?"

"I'll tell you," she replied.

And she told me. Her story was not of world-shaking moment, but it
interested me. I have since learned its substantial correctness
and am able to add some supplementary details.

You see, things were like this.... In order to start I must go
back some years.... I have always had a warm corner in my heart
for little Phyllis Gedge, ever since she was a blue-eyed child. My
wife had a great deal to do with it. She was a woman of dauntless
courage and clear vision into the heart of things. I find many a
reflection of her in Betty. Perhaps that is why I love Betty so
dearly.

Some strange, sweet fool feminine of gentle birth and deplorable
upbringing fell in love with a vehemently socialistic young
artisan by the name of Gedge and married him. Her casual but
proud-minded family wiped her off the proud family slate. She
brought Phyllis into the world and five years afterwards found
herself be-Gedged out of existence. They were struggling people in
those days, and before her death my wife used to employ her, when
she could, for household sewing and whatnot. And tiny Phyllis, in
a childless home, became a petted darling. When my great
loneliness came upon me, it was a solace to have the little dainty
prattling thing to spend an occasional hour in my company. Gedge,
an excellent workman, set up as a contractor. He took my modest
home under his charge. A leaky tap, a broken pane, a new set of
bookshelves, a faulty drainpipe--all were matters for Gedge. I
abhorred his politics but I admired his work, and I continued,
with Mrs. Marigold's motherly aid, to make much of Phyllis.

Gedge, for queer motives of his own, sent her to as good a school
as he could afford, as a matter of fact an excellent school, one
where she met girls of a superior social class and learned
educated speech and graceful manners. Her holidays, poor child,
were somewhat dreary, for her father, an anti-social creature, had
scarce a friend in the town. Save for here and there an invitation
to tea from Betty or myself, she did not cross the threshold of a
house in Wellingsford. But to my house, all through her schooldays
and afterwards, Phyllis came, and on such occasions Mrs. Marigold
prepared teas of the organic lusciousness dear to the heart of a
healthy girl.

Now, here comes the point of all this palaver. Young Master
Randall used also to come to my house. Now and then by chance they
met there. They were good boy and girl friends.

I want to make it absolutely clear that her acquaintance with
Randall was not any vulgar picking-up-in-the-street affair.

When she left school, her father made her his book-keeper,
secretary, confidential clerk. Anybody turning into the office to
summon Gedge to repair a roof or a burst boiler had a preliminary
interview with Phyllis. Young Randall, taking over the business of
the upkeep of his mother's house, gradually acquired the habit of
such preliminary interviews. The whole imbroglio was very simple,
very natural. They had first met at my own rich cake and jam-puff
bespread tea-table. When Randall went into the office to speak,
presumably, about a defective draught in the kitchen range, and
really about things quite different, the ethics of the matter
depended entirely on Randall's point of view. Their meetings had
been contrived by no unmaidenly subterfuge on the part of Phyllis.
She knew him to be above her in social station. She kept him off
as long as she could. But que voulez-vous? Randall was a very
good-looking, brilliant, and fascinating fellow; Phyllis was a
dear little human girl. And it is the human way of such girls to
fall in love with such fascinating, brilliant fellows. I not only
hold a brief for Phyllis, but I am the judge, too, and having
heard all the evidence, I deliver a verdict overwhelmingly in her
favour. Given the circumstances as I have stated them, she was
bound to fall in love with Randall, and in doing so committed not
the little tiniest speck of a peccadillo.

My first intimation of tender relations between them came from my
sight of them in February in Wellings Park. Since then, of course,
I have much which I will tell you as best I may.

So now for Betty's story, confirmed and supplemented by what I
have learned later. But before plunging into the matter, I must
say that when Betty had ended I took up my little parable and told
her of all that Randall had told me concerning his repudiation of
Gedge. And Betty listened with a curiously stony face and said
nothing.

When Betty puts on that face of granite I am quite unhappy. That
is why I have always hated the statues of Egypt. There is
something beneath their cold faces that you can't get at.





CHAPTER XI


Gedge bitterly upbraided his daughter, both for her desertion of
his business and her criminal folly in abandoning it so as to help
mend the shattered bodies of fools and knaves who, by joining the
forces of militarism, had betrayed the Sacred Cause of the
International Solidarity of Labour. His first ground for complaint
was scarcely tenable; with his dwindling business the post of
clerk had dwindled into a sinecure. To sit all day at the receipt
of imaginary custom is not a part fitted for a sane and healthy
young human being. Still, from Gedge's point of view her defection
was a grievance; but that she could throw in her lot openly with
the powers of darkness was nothing less than an outrage.

I suppose, in a kind of crabbed way, the crabbed fellow was fond
of Phyllis. She was pretty. She had dainty tricks of dress. She
flitted, an agreeable vision, about his house. He liked to hear
her play the piano, not because he had any ear for music, but
because it tickled his vanity to reflect that he, the agricultural
labourer's son and apprentice to a village carpenter, was the
possessor both of a Broadway Grand and of a daughter who, entirely
through his efforts, had learned to play on it. Like most of his
political type, he wallowed in his own peculiar snobbery. But of
anything like companionship between father and daughter there had
existed very little. While railing, wherever he found ears into
which to rail, against the vicious luxury and sordid shallowness
of the upper middle classes, his instinctive desire to shine above
his poorer associates had sent Phyllis to an upper middle class
school. Now Gedge had a certain amount of bookish and political
intelligence. Phyllis inheriting the intellectual equipment of her
sentimental fool of a mother, had none, Oh! she had a vast fund of
ordinary commonsense. Of that I can assure you. A bit of hard
brain fibre from her father had counteracted any over-sentimental
folly in the maternal heritage. And she came back from school a
very ladylike little person. If pressed, she could reel off all
kinds of artificial scraps of knowledge, like a dear little
parrot. But she had never heard of Karl Marx and didn't want to
hear. She had a vague notion that International Socialism was a
movement in favour of throwing bombs at monarchs and of seizing
the wealth of the rich in order to divide it among the poor--and
she regarded it as abominable. When her father gave her Fabian
Society tracts to read, he might just as well, for all her
understanding of the argument, set her down to a Treatise on the
Infinitesimal Calculus. Her brain stood blank before such abstract
disquisitions. She loved easily comprehended poetry and novels
that made her laugh or cry and set her mind dancing round the
glowing possibilities of life; all disastrous stuff abhorred by
the International Socialist, to whom the essential problems of
existence are of no interest whatever. So, after a few futile
attempts to darken her mind, Gedge put her down as a mere fool
woman, and ceased to bother his head about her intellectual
development. That came to him quite naturally. There is no Turk
more contemptuous of his womankind's political ideas than the
Gedges of our enlightened England. But on other counts she was a
distinct asset. He regarded her with immense pride, as a more
ornamental adjunct to his house than any other county builder and
contractor could display, and, recognising that she was possessed
of some low feminine cunning in the way of adding up figures and
writing letters, made use of her in his office as general clerical
factotum.

When the war broke out, he discovered, to his horror, that Phyllis
actually had political ideas--unshakable, obstinate ideas opposed
to his own--and that he had been nourishing in his bosom a
viperous patriot. Phyllis, for her part, realised with equal
horror the practical significance of her father's windy theories.
When Randall, who had stolen her heart, took to visiting the
house, in order, as far as she could make out, to talk treason
with her father, the strain of the situation grew more than she
could bear. She fled to Betty for advice. Betty promptly stepped
in and whisked her off to the hospital.

It was on the morning on which Randall interviewed me in the
garden, the morning after he had broken with Gedge that Phyllis,
having a little off-time, went home. She found her father in the
office making out a few bills. He thrust forward his long chin and
aggressive beard and scowled at her.

"Oh, it's you, is it? Come at last where your duty calls you, eh?"

"I always come when I can, father," she replied.

She bent down and kissed his cheek. He caught her roughly round
the waist and, leaning back in his chair, looked up at her sourly.

"How long are you going on defying me like this?"

She tried to disengage herself, but his arm was too strong. "Oh,
father," she said, rather wearily, "don't let us go over this old
argument again."

"But suppose I find some new argument? Suppose I send you packing
altogether, refuse to contribute further to your support. What
then?"

She started at the threat but replied valiantly: "I should have to
earn my own living."

"How are you going to do it?"

"There are heaps of ways."

He laughed. "There ain't; as you'd soon find out. They don't even
pay you for being scullery-maid to a lot of common soldiers."

She protested against that view of her avocation. In the perfectly
appointed Wellingsford Hospital she had no scullery work. She was
a probationer, in training as a nurse. He still gripped her.

"The particular kind of tomfoolery you are up to doesn't matter.
We needn't quarrel. I've another proposition to put before you--
much more to your fancy, I think. You like this Mr. Randall
Holmes, don't you?"

She shivered a little and flushed deep red. Her father had never
touched on the matter before. She said, straining away:

"I don't want to talk about Mr. Holmes."

"But I do. Come, my dear. In this life there must be always a
certain amount of give and take. I'm not the man to drive a one-
sided bargain. I'll make you a fair offer--as between father and
daughter. I'll wipe out all that's past. In leaving me like this,
when misfortune has come upon me, you've been guilty of unfilial
conduct--no one can deny it But I'll overlook everything, forgive
you fully and take you to my heart again and leave you free to do
whatever you like without interfering with your opinions, if
you'll promise me one thing--"

"I know what you're going to say." She twisted round on him
swiftly. "I 'll promise at once. I'll never marry Mr. Holmes. I've
already told him I won't marry him."

Surprise relaxed his grip. She took swift advantage and sheered
away to the other side of the table. He rose and brought down his
hand with a thump.

"You refused him? Why, you silly little baggage, my condition is
that you should marry him. You're sweet on him aren't you?"

"I detest him," cried Phyllis. "Why should I marry him?"

Her eyes, young and pure, divined some sordid horror behind eyes
crafty and ignoble. Once before she had had such a fleeting,
uncomprehended vision into the murky depths of the man's soul.
This was some time ago. In the routine of her secretarial duties
she had, one morning, opened and read a letter, not marked
"Private" or "Personal," whose tenor she could scarcely
understand. When she handed it to her father, he smiled,
vouchsafed a specious explanation, and looked at her in just the
same crafty and ignoble fashion, and she shrank away frightened.
The matter kept her awake for a couple of nights. Then, for sheer
easing of her heart, she went to her adored Betty Fairfax, her
Lady Patroness and Mother Confessor, who, being wise and strong,
and possessing the power of making her kind eyes unfathomable,
laughed, bade her believe her father's explanation, and sent her
away comforted. The incident passed out of her mind. But now
memory smote her, as she shrank from her father's gaze and the
insincere smile on his thin lips.

"For one thing," he replied after a pause, pulling his straggly
beard, "your poor dear mother was a lady, and if she had lived she
would have wanted you to marry a gentleman. It's for her sake I've
given you an education that fits you to consort with gentlefolk--
just for her sake--don't make any mistake about it, for I've
always hated the breed. If I've violated my principles in order to
meet her wishes, I think you ought to meet them too. You wouldn't
like to marry a small tradesman or a working man, would you?"

"I'm not going to marry anybody," cried Phyllis. She was only a
pink and white, very ordinary little girl. I have no idealisations
or illusions concerning Phyllis. But she had a little fine steel
of character running through her. It flashed on Gedge.

"I don't want to marry anybody," she declared. "But I'd sooner
marry a bricklayer who was fighting for his country than a fine
gentleman like Mr. Holmes who wasn't. I'd sooner die," she cried
passionately.

"Then go and die and be damned to you!" snarled Gedge, planting
himself noisily in his chair. "I've no use for khaki-struck
drivelling idiots. I've no use for patriots. Bah! Damn patriots!
The upper classes are out for all they can get, and they befool
the poor imbecile working man with all their highfalutin phrases
to get it for them at the cost of his blood. I've no use for them,
I tell you. And I've no use either for undutiful daughters. I've
no use for young women who blow hot and cold. Haven't I seen you
with the fellow? Do you think I'm a blind dodderer? Do you think I
haven't kept an eye on you? Haven't I seen you blowing as hot as
you please? And now because he refuses to be a blinking idiot and
have his guts blown out in this war of fools and knaves and
capitalists, you blast him like a three-farthing iceberg."

Everything in her that was tender, maidenly, English, shrank
lacerated. But the steel held her. She put both her hands on the
table and bent over towards him.

"But, father, except that he's a gentleman, you haven't told me
why you want me to marry Mr. Holmes."

He fidgeted with his fingers. "Haven't you a spark of affection
for me left?"

She said dutifully, "Yes, father."

"I want you to marry him. I've set my heart on it. It has been the
one bright hope in my life for months. Can't you marry him because
you love me?"

"One generally marries because one loves the man one's going to
marry," said Phyllis.

"But you do love him," cried Gedge. "Either you're just a wanton
little hussy or you must care for the fellow."

"I don't. I hate him. And I don't want to have anything more to do
with him." The tears came. "He's a pro-German and I won't have
anything to do with pro-Germans."

She fled precipitately from the office into the street and made a
blind course to the hospital; feeling, in dumb misery, that she
had committed the unforgivable sin of casting off her father and,
at the same time, that she had made stalwart proclamation of her
faith. If ever a good, loyal little heart was torn into piteous
shreds, that little heart was Phyllis's.

In the bare X-ray room of the hospital, which happened to be
vacant, Betty sat on the one straight-backed wooden chair, while
a weeping damsel on the uncarpeted floor sobbed in her lap and
confessed her sins and sought absolution.

Of course Gedge was a fool. If I, or any wise, diplomatic, tactful
person like myself, had found it necessary to tackle a young woman
on the subject of a matrimonial alliance, we should have gone
about the business in quite a different way. But what could you
expect from an anarchical Turk like Gedge?

Phyllis, not knowing whether she were outcast and disinherited or
not, found, of course, a champion in Betty, who, in her spacious
manner, guaranteed her freedom from pecuniary worries for the rest
of her life. But Phyllis was none the less profoundly unhappy, and
it took a whole convoy of wounded to restore her to cheerfulness.
You can't attend to a poor brave devil grinning with pain, while a
surgeon pokes a six-inch probe down a sinus in search of bits of
bone or shrapnel, and be acutely conscious of your own two-penny-
half-penny little miseries. Many a heartache, in this wise, has
been cured in the Houses of Pain.

Now, nothing much would have happened, I suppose, if Phyllis,
driven from the hospital by superior decree that she should take
fresh air and exercise, had not been walking some days afterwards
across the common by the canal. Bordering the latter, Wellingsford
has an avenue of secular chestnuts of which it is inordinately
proud. Dispersed here and there are wooden benches sanctified by
generations of lovers. Carven thereon are the presentments, often
interlaced, of hearts that have long since ceased to beat; lonely
hearts transfixed by arrows, which in all probability survived the
wound and inspired the owner to the parentage of a dozen children;
initials once, individually, the record of many a romance, but
now, collectively, merely an alphabet run mad.

Phyllis entered the avenue, practically deserted at midday, and
rested, a pathetically lonely little grey-uniformed figure on one
of the benches. On the common, some distance behind her, stretched
the lines of an Army Service train, with mules and waggons, and
here and there a tent. In front of her, beyond the row of trees,
was the towing-path; an old horse in charge of a boy jogged by,
pulling something of which only a moving stove pipe like a
periscope was visible above the bank. Overhead the chestnuts
rioted in broad leaf and pink and white blossom, showing starry
bits of blue sky and admitting arrow shafts of spring sunshine. A
dirty white mongrel dog belonging to the barge came up to her,
sniffed, and made friends; then, at last obeying a series of
whistles from the boy, looked at her apologetically and trotted
off. Her gaze followed him wistfully, for he was a very human dear
dog, and with a sympathetic understanding of all her difficulties
in his deep topaz eyes. After that she had as companions a couple
of butterflies and a bumble-bee and a perky, portly robin who
hopped within an inch of her feet and looked up at her sideways
out of his hard little eye (so different from the dog's) with the
expression of one who would say: "The most beauteous and
delectable worm I have ever encountered. If I were a bit bigger,
say the size of the roc of the Arabian Nights, what a dainty
morsel you would make! In the meantime can't you shed something of
yourself for my entertainment like others, though grosser, of your
species?" She laughed at the cold impudence of the creature, just
as she had smiled at the butterflies and the bumble-bee. She
surrendered herself to the light happiness of the moment. It was
good to escape for an hour from the rigid lines of beds and the
pale suffering faces and the eternal faint odour of disinfectants,
into all this greenery and the fellowship of birds and beasts
unconscious of war. She remembered that once, in the pocket of her
cloak, there had been a biscuit or two. Very slowly and carefully,
her mind fixed on the robin, she fished for crumbs and very
carefully and gently she fed the impudent, stomach-centred fellow.
She had attracted him to the end of the seat, when, whizz and
clatter, came a motor cycle down the avenue, and off in a terrible
scare flew the robin; the idyll of tree and beast and birds
suffered instant disruption and Randall Holmes, in his canvas
suit, stood before her.

He said:

"Good morning, Phyllis."

She said, with cold politeness: "Good morning." But she asked the
spring morning in dumb piteousness, "Oh, why has he come? Why has
he come to spoil it all?"

He sat down by her side. "This is the luckiest chance I've ever
had--finding you here," he said. "You've had all my letters,
haven't you?"

"Yes," she answered, "and I've torn them all up."

"Why?"

"Because I didn't want them," she flashed on him: "I've destroyed
them without reading them."

He flushed angrily. Apart from the personal affront, the fact that
the literary products of a poet, precious and, in this case,
sincere, should have been destroyed, unread, was an anti-social
outrage.

"If it didn't please a woman to believe in God," he said, "and God
came in Person and stood in front of her, she would run out of the
room and call upon somebody to come and shoot Him for a burglar,
just to prove she was right."

Phyllis was shocked. Her feminine mind pounced on the gross
literalness of his rhetorical figure.

"I've never heard anything more blasphemous and horrible," she
exclaimed, moving to her end of the bench. "Putting yourself in
the position of the Almighty! Oh!" she flung out her hand. "Don't
speak to me."

In spite of the atheistical Gedge, Phyllis believed in God and
Jesus Christ and the Ten Commandments. She also believed in a host
of other simple things, such as Goodness and Truth, Virtue and
Patriotism. The arguments and theories and glosses that her father
and Randall wove about them appeared to her candid mind as
meaningless arabesques. She could not see how all the
complications concerning the elementary canons of faith and
conduct could arise. She appreciated Randall's intellectual gifts;
his power of weaving magical words into rhyme fascinated her; she
was childlike in her wonder at his command of the printed page;
when he revealed to her the beauty of things, as the rogue had a
pretty knack of doing, her nature thrilled responsive. He gave her
a thousand glimpses into a new world, and she loved him for it.
But when he talked lightly of sacred matters, such as God and
Duty, he ran daggers into her heart. She almost hated him.

He had to expend much eloquence and persuasion to induce her to
listen to him. He had no wish to break any of the Commandments,
especially the Third. He professed penitence. But didn't she see
that her treatment of him was driving him into a desperate
unbelief in God and man? When a woman accepted a man's love she
accepted many responsibilities.

Phyllis stonily denied acceptance.

"I've refused it. You've asked me to marry you and I told you I
wouldn't. And I won't."

"You're mixing up two things," he said, with a smile. "Love and
marriage. Many people love and don't marry, just as many marry and
don't love. Now once you did tell me that you loved me, and so you
accepted my love. There's no getting out of it. I've given you
everything I've got, and you can't throw it away. The question is
--what are you going to do with it? What are you going to do with
me?"

His sophistries frightened her; but she cut through them.

"Isn't it rather a question of what you're going to do with
yourself?"

"If you give me up I don't care a hang what becomes of me." He
came very near and his voice was dangerously soft. "Phyllis dear,
I do love you with all my heart. Why won't you marry me?"

But a hateful scene rushed to her memory. She drew herself up.

"Why are my father and you persecuting me to marry you?"

"Your father?" he interrupted, in astonishment. "When?"

She named the day, Wednesday of last week. In desperation she told
him what had happened. The poor child was fighting for her soul
against great odds.

"It's a conspiracy to get me round to your way of thinking. You
want me to be a pro-German like yourselves, and I won't be a pro-
German, and I think it wicked even to talk to pro-Germans!"

She rose, all sobs, fluster, and heroism, and walked away. He
strode a step or two and stood in front of her with his hands on
her shoulders.

"I've never spoken to your father in that way about you. Never.
Not a word has passed my lips about my caring for you. On my word
of honour. On Tuesday night I left your father's house never to go
there again. I told him so."

She writhed out of his grasp and spread the palms of her hands
against him. "Please don't," she said, and seeing that she stood
her ground, he made no further attempt to touch her. The austerity
of her grey nurse's uniform gave a touch of pathos to her
childish, blue-eyed comeliness and her pretty attitude of
defiance.

"I suppose," she said, "he was too pro-German even for you."

He looked at her for a long time disconcertingly: so
disconcertingly and with so much pain and mysterious hesitation in
his eyes as to set even Phyllis's simple mind a-wondering and to
make her emphasize it, in her report of the matter to Betty, as
extraordinary and frightening. It seemed, so she explained, in her
innocent way, that he had discovered something horrible about her
father which he shrank from telling her. But if they had
quarrelled so bitterly, why had her father the very next day urged
her to marry him? The answer came in a ghastly flash. She recoiled
as though in the presence of defilement. If she married Randall,
his lips would be closed against her father. That is what her
father had meant. The vague, disquieting suspicions of years that
he might not have the same standards of uprightness as other men,
attained an awful certainty. She remembered the incident of the
private letter and the look in her father's eyes. ... Finally she
revolted. Her soul grew sick. She took no heed of Randall's
protest. She only saw that she was to be the cloak to cover up
something unclean between them. At a moment like this no woman
pretends to have a sense of justice. Randall had equal share with
her father in an unknown baseness. She hated him as he stood there
so strong and handsome. And she hated herself for having loved
him.

At last he said with a smile:

"Yes, That's just it."

"What?"

She had forgotten the purport of her last remark.

"He was a bit too--well, not too pro-German--but too anti-English
for me. You have got hold of the wrong end of the stick all the
time, Phyllis dear. I'm no more pro-German than you are. Perhaps I
see things more clearly than you do. I've been trained to an
intellectual view of human phenomena."

Her little pink and white face hardened until it looked almost
ugly. The unpercipient young man continued:

"And so I take my stand on a position that you must accept on
trust. I am English to the backbone. You can't possibly dream that
I'm not. Come, dear, let me try to explain."

His arm curved as if to encircle her waist. She sprang away.

"Don't touch me. I couldn't bear it. There's something about you I
can't understand."

In her attitude, too, he found a touch of the incomprehensible. He
said, however, with a sneer:

"If I were swaggering about in a cheap uniform, you'd find me
simplicity itself."

She caught at his opening, desperately.

"Yes. At any rate I'd find a man. A man who wasn't afraid to fight
for his country."

"Afraid!"

"Yes," she cried, and her blue eyes blazed. "Afraid. That's why I
can't marry you. I'd rather die than marry you. I've never told
you. I thought you'd guess. I'm an English girl and I can't marry
a coward--a coward--a coward--a coward."

Her voice ended on a foolish high note, for Randall, very white,
had seized her by the wrist.

"You little fool," he cried. "You'll live to repent what you've
said."

He released her, mounted his motor bicycle, and rode away. Phyllis
watched him disappear up the avenue; then she walked rather
blindly back to the bench and sat down among the ruins of a black
and abominable world. After a while the friendly robin, seeing her
so still, perched first on the back of the bench and then hopped
on the seat by her side, and cocking his head, looked at her
enquiringly out of his little hard eye, as though he would say:

"My dear child, what are you making all this fuss about? Isn't it
early June? Isn't the sun shining? Aren't the chestnuts in flower?
Don't you see that bank of dark blue cloud over there which means
a nice softening rain in the night and a jolly good breakfast of
worms in the morning? What's wrong with this exquisitely perfect
universe?"

And Phyllis--on her own confession--with an angry gesture sent him
scattering up among the cool broad leaves and cried:

"Get away, you hateful little beast!"

And having no use for robins and trees and spring and sunshine and
such like intolerable ironies, a white little wisp of a nurse left
them all to their complacent riot and went back to the hospital.





CHAPTER XII


A few days after this, Mrs. Holmes sent me under cover a telegram
which she had received from her son. It was dispatched from
Aberdeen and ran: "Perfectly well. Don't worry about me. Love.
Randall." And that was all I heard of him for some considerable
time. What he was doing in Aberdeen, a city remote from his sphere
of intellectual, political, and social activities, Heaven and
himself alone knew. I must confess that I cared very little. He
was alive, he was well, and his mother had no cause for anxiety.
Phyllis had definitely sent him packing. There was no reason for
me to allow speculation concerning him to keep me awake of nights.

I had plenty to think about besides Randall. They made me Honorary
Treasurer of the local Volunteer Training Corps which had just
been formed. The members not in uniform wore a red brassard with
"G.R." in black. The facetious all over the country called them
"Gorgeous Wrecks." I must confess that on their first few parades
they did not look very military. Their composite paunchiness,
beardedness, scragginess, spectacledness, impressed me
unfavourably when, from my Hosea-carriage, I first beheld them.
Marigold, who was one of the first to join and to leap into the
grey uniform, tried to swagger about as an instructor. But as the
little infantry drill he had ever learned had all been changed
since the Boer War, I gathered an unholy joy from seeing him hang
like a little child on the lips of the official Sergeant
Instructor of the corps. In the evenings he and I mugged up the
text-books together; and with the aid of the books I put him
through all the new physical exercises. I was a privileged person.
I could take my own malicious pleasure out of Marigold's enforced
humility, but I would be hanged if anybody else should. Sergeant
Marigold should instruct those volunteers as he once instructed
the recruits of his own battery. So I worked with him like a
nigger until there was nothing in the various drills of a modern
platoon that he didn't know, and nothing that he could not do with
the mathematical precision of his splendid old training.

One night during the thick of it Betty came in. I waved her into a
corner of the library out of the way, and she smoked cigarettes
and looked on at the performance. Now I come to think of it, we
must have afforded an interesting spectacle. There was the gaunt,
one-eyed, preposterously wigged image clad in undervest and
shrunken yellow flannel trousers which must have dated from his
gym-instructor days in the nineties, violently darting down on
his heels, springing up, kicking out his legs, shooting out his
arms, like an inspired marionette, all at the words of command
shouted in fervent earnest by a shrivelled up little cripple in a
wheel-chair.

When it was over--the weather was warm--he passed a curved
forefinger over his dripping forehead, cut himself short in an
instinctive action and politely dried his hand on the seat of his
trousers. Then his one eye gleamed homage at Betty and he drew
himself up to attention.

"Do you mind, sir, if I send in Ellen with the drinks?"

I nodded. "You'll do very well with a drink yourself, Marigold."

"It's thirsty work and weather, sir."

He made a queer movement of his hand--it would have been idiotic
of him to salute--but he had just been dismissed from military
drill, so his hand went up to the level of his breast and--right
about turn--he marched out of the room. Betty rose from her corner
and threw herself in her usual impetuous way on the ground by my
chair.

"Do you know," she cried, "you two dear old things were too funny
for words."

But as I saw that her eyes were foolishly moist, I was not as
offended as I might have been by her perception of the ludicrous.

When I said that I had plenty to think about besides Randall, I
meant to string off a list. My prolixity over the Volunteer
Training Corps came upon me unawares. I wanted to show you that my
time was fairly well occupied. I was Chairman of our town Belgian
Relief Committee. I was a member of our County Territorial
Association and took over a good deal of special work connected
with one of our battalions that was covering itself with glory and
little mounds topped with white crosses at the front. If you think
I lived a Tom-tabby, tea-party sort of life, you are quite
mistaken, if the War Office could have its way, it would have
lashed me in red tape, gagged me with Regulations, and sealing-
waxed me up in my bed-room. And there are thousands of us who have
shaken our fists under the nose of the War Office and shouted,
"All your blighting, Man-with-the-Mudrake officialdom shan't
prevent us from serving our country." And it hasn't! The very
Government itself, in spite of its monumental efforts, has not
been able to shackle us into inertia or drug us into apathy. Such
non-combatant francs-tireurs in England have done a power of good
work.

And then, of course, there was the hospital which, in one way or
another, took up a good deal of my time.

I was reposing in the front garden one late afternoon in mid-June,
after a well-filled day, when a car pulled up at the gate, in
which were Betty (at the wheel) and a wounded soldier, in khaki,
his cap perched on top of a bandaged head. I don't know whether it
is usual for young women in nurse's uniform to career about the
country driving wounded men in motor cars, but Betty did it. She
cared very little for the usual. She came in, leaving the man in
the car, and crossed the lawn, flushed and bright-eyed, a
refreshing picture for a tired man.

"We're in a fix up at the hospital," she announced as soon as she
was in reasonable speaking distance, "and I want you to get us out
of it."

Sitting on the grass, she told me the difficulty. A wounded
soldier, discharged from some distant hospital, and home now on
sick furlough before rejoining his depot, had been brought into
the hospital with a broken head. The modern improvements on
vinegar and brown paper having been applied, the man was now ready
to leave. I interrupted with the obvious question. Why couldn't he
go to his own home? It appeared that the prospect terrified him.
On his arrival, at midday, after eight months' absence in France,
he found that his wife had sold or pawned practically everything
in the place, and that the lady herself was in the violent phase
of intoxication. His natural remonstrances not being received with
due meekness, a quarrel arose from which the lady emerged
victorious. She laid her poor husband out with a poker. They could
not keep him in hospital. He shied at an immediate renewal of
conjugal life. He had no relations or intimate friends in
Wellingsford. Where was the poor devil to go?

"I thought I might bring him along here and let the Marigolds look
after him for a week or two."

"Indeed," said I. "I admire your airy ways."

"I know you do," she replied, "and that's why I've brought him."

"Is that the fellow?"

She laughed. "You're right first time. How did you guess?" She
scrambled to her feet. "I'll fetch him in."

She fetched him in, a haggard, broad-shouldered man with a back
like a sloping plank of wood. He wore corporal's stripes. He
saluted and stood at rigid attention.

"This is Tufton," said Betty.

I despatched her in search of Marigold. To Tufton I said,
regarding him with what, without vanity, I may term an expert eye:

"You're an old soldier."

"Yes, sir."

"Guards?"

His eyes brightened. "Yes, sir. Seven years in the Grenadiers.
Then two years out. Rejoined on outbreak of war, sir."

I rubbed my hands together in satisfaction. "I'm an old soldier
too," said I

"So Sister told me, sir."

A delicate shade in the man's tone and manner caught at my heart.
Perhaps it was the remotest fraction of a glance at my rug-covered
legs, the pleased recognition of my recognition, ... perhaps some
queer freemasonry of the old Army.

"You seem to be in trouble, boy," said I. "Tell me all about it
and I'll do what I can to help you."

So he told his story. After his discharge from the Army he had
looked about for a job and found one at the mills in Wellingsford,
where he had met the woman, a mill-hand, older than himself, whom
he had married. She had been a bit extravagant and fond of her
glass, but when he left her to rejoin the regiment, he had had no
anxieties. She did not write often, not being very well educated
and finding difficult the composition of letters. A machine gun
bullet had gone through his chest, just missing his lung. He had
been two months in hospital. He had written to her announcing his
arrival. She had not met him at the station. He had tramped home
with his kit-bag on his back--and the cracked head was his
reception. He supposed she had had a lot of easy money and had
given way to temptation--and

"And what's a man to do, sir?"

"I'm sure I don't know, Corporal," said I. "It's damned hard lines
on you. But, at any rate, you can look upon this as your home for
as long as you like to stay."

"Thank you kindly, sir," said he.

I turned and beckoned to Betty and Marigold, who had been hovering
out of earshot by the house door. They approached.

"I want to have a word with Marigold," I said.

Tufton saluted and went off with Betty. Sergeant Marigold stood
stiff as a ramrod on the spot which Tufton had occupied.

"I suppose Mrs. Connor," said I, "has told you all about this poor
chap?"

"Yes, sir," said Marigold.

"We must put him up comfortably. That's quite simple. The only
thing that worries me is this--supposing his wife comes around
here raising Cain--?"

Marigold held me with his one glittering eye--an eye glittering
with the pride of the gunner and the pride (more chastened) of the
husband.

"You can leave all that, sir, to Mrs. Marigold. If she isn't more
than a match for any Grenadier Guardsman's wife, then I haven't
been married to her for the last twenty years."

Nothing more was to be said. Marigold marched the man off, leaving
me alone with Betty.

"I'm going to get in before Mrs. Marigold," she remarked, with a
smile. "I'm off now to interview Madam Tufton and bring back her
husband's kit."

In some ways it is a pity Betty isn't a man. She would make a
splendid soldier. I don't think such a thing as fear, physical,
moral, or spiritual, lurks in any recess of Betty's nature. Not
every young woman would brave, without trepidation, a virago who
had cracked a hard-bitten warrior's head with a poker.

"Marigold and I will come with you," I said.

She protested. It was nonsense. Suppose Mrs. Tufton went for
Marigold and spoiled his beauty? No. It was too dangerous. No
place for men. We argued. At last I blew the police-whistle which
I wear on the end of my watch-chain. Marigold came hurrying out of
the house.

"Mrs. Connor is going to take us for a run," said I.

"Very good, sir."

"Your blood be on your own heads," said Betty.

We talked a while of what had happened. Vague stories of the
demoralization of wives left alone with a far greater weekly
income than they had ever handled before had reached our ears. We
had read them in the newspapers. But till now we had never come
across an example. The woman in question belonged to a bad type.
Various dregs from large cities drift into the mills around little
country towns and are the despair of Mayors, curates, and other
local authorities. We genteel folk regarded them as a plague-spot
in the midst of us.

I remember the scandal when the troops first came in August, 1914,
to Wellingsford--a scandal put a summary end to, after a
fortnight's grinning amazement at our country morals, by the
troops themselves. Tufton had married into an undesirable
community.

"We're wasting time," said Betty.

So Marigold put me into the back of the car and mounted into the
front seat by Betty, and we started.

Flowery End was the poetic name of the mean little row of red-
brick houses inhabited exclusively by Mrs. Tufton and her
colleagues at the mills. To get to it you turn off the High Street
by the Post Office, turn to the right down Avonmore Avenue, and
then to the left. There you find Flowery End, and, fifty yards
further on, the main road to Godbury crosses it at right angles.
Betty, who lived on the Godbury Road, was quite familiar with
Flowery End. Mid-June did its best to justify the name. Here and
there, in the tiny patches of front garden, a tenant tried to help
mid-June by cultivating wall-flowers and geraniums and snapdragon
and a rose or two; but the majority cared as much for the beauty
of mid-June as for the cleanliness of their children,--an
unsightly brood, with any slovenly rags about their bodies, and
the circular crust of last week's treacle on their cheeks. In his
abominable speeches before the war Gedge used to point out these
children to unsympathetic Wellingsfordians as the Infant Martyrs
of an Accursed Capitalism.

Betty pulled up the car at Number Seven. Marigold sprang out,
helped her down, and would have walked up the narrow flagged path
to knock at the door. But she declined his aid, and he stood
sentry by the gap where the wicket gate of the garden should have
been. I saw the door open on Betty's summons, and a brawny,
tousled, red-faced woman appear--a most horrible and forbidding
female, although bearing traces of a once blowsy beauty. As in
most cottages hereabouts, you entered straight from garden-plot
into the principal livingroom. On each side of the two figures I
obtained a glimpse of stark emptiness.

Betty said: "Are you Mrs. Tufton? I've come to talk to you about
your husband. Let me come in."

The attack was so debonair, so unquestioning, that the woman
withdrew a pace or two and Betty, following up her advantage,
entered and shut the door behind her. I could not have done what
Betty did if I had had as many legs as a centipede. Marigold
turned to me anxiously.

"You do think she's safe, sir?"

I nodded. "Anyway, stand by."

The neighbours came out of adjoining houses; slatternly women with
babies, more unwashed children, an elderly, vacant male or two--
the young men and maidens had not yet been released from the
mills. As far as I could gather, there was amused discussion among
the gossips concerning the salient features of Sergeant Marigold's
physical appearance. I heard one lady bid another to look at his
wicked old eye, and receive the humorous rejoinder: "Which one?" I
should have liked to burn them as witches; but Marigold stood his
ground, imperturbable.

Presently the door opened, and Betty came sailing down the path
with a red spot on each cheek, followed by Mrs. Tufton,
vociferous.

"Sergeant Marigold," cried Betty. "Will you kindly go into that
house and fetch out Corporal Tufton's kit-bag?"

"Very good, madam," said Marigold.

"Sergeant or no sergeant," cried Mrs. Tufton, squaring her elbows
and barring his way, "nobody's coming into my house to touch any
of my husband's property...." Really what she said I cannot
record. The British Tommy I know upside-down, inside-out. I could
talk to you about him for the week together. The ordinary
soldier's wife, good, straight, heroic soul, I know as well and
and profoundly admire as I do the ordinary wife of a brother-
officer, and I could tell you what she thinks and feels in her own
language. But the class whence Mrs. Tufton proceeded is out of my
social ken. She was stale-drunk; she had, doubtless, a vile
headache; probably she felt twinges of remorse and apprehension of
possible police interference. As a counter-irritant to this, she
had worked herself into an astounding temper. She would give up
none of her husband's belongings. She would have the law on them
if they tried. Bad enough it was for her husband to come home
after a year's desertion, leaving her penniless, and the moment he
set eyes on her begin to knock her about; but for sergeants
suffering under a blight and characterless females masquerading as
hospital nurses to come and ride rough-shod over an honest working
woman was past endurance. Thus I paraphrase my memory of the
lady's torrential speech. "Lay your hand on me," she cried, "and
I'll summons you for assault."

As Marigold could not pass her without laying hands on her, and as
the laying of hands on her, no matter how lightly, would
indubitably have constituted an assault in the eyes of the law,
Marigold stiffly confronted her and tried to argue.

The neighbours listened in sardonic amusement. Betty stood by,
with the spots burning on her cheek, clenching her slender capable
fingers, furious at defeat. I was condemned to sit in the car a
few yards off, an anxious spectator. In a moment's lull of the
argument, Betty interposed:

"Every woman here knows what you have done. You ought to be
ashamed of yourself."

"And you ought to be ashamed of yourself," Mrs. Tufton retorted--
"taking an honest woman's husband away from her."

It was time to interfere. I called out:

"Betty, let us get back. I'll fix the man up with everything he
wants."

At the moment of her turning to me a telegraph boy hopped from his
bicycle on the off-side of the ear and touched his cap.

"I've a telegram for Mrs. Connor, sir. I recognised the car and I
think that's the lady. So instead of going on to the house--"

I cut him short. Yes. That was Mrs. Connor of Telford Lodge. He
dodged round the car and, entering the garden path, handed the
orange-coloured envelope to Betty. She took it from him absent-
mindedly, her heart and soul engaged in the battle with Mrs.
Tufton. The boy stood patient for a second or two.

"Any answer, ma'am?"

She turned so that I could see her face in profile, and
impatiently opened the envelope and glanced at the message. Then
she stiffened, seeming in a curious way to become many inches
taller, and grew deadly white. The paper dropped from her hand.
Marigold picked it up.

The diversion of the telegraph boy had checked Mrs. Tufton's
eloquence and compelled the idle interest of the neighbours. I
cried out from the car:

"What's the matter?"

But I don't think Betty heard me. She recovered herself, took the
telegram from Marigold, and showed it to the woman.

"Read it," said Betty, in a strange, hard voice. "This is to tell
me that my husband was killed yesterday in France. Go on your
knees and thank God that you have a brave husband still alive and
pray that you may be worthy of him."

She went into the house and in a moment reappeared like a ghost of
steel, carrying the disputed canvas kit-bag over her shoulder. The
woman stared open-mouthed and said nothing. Marigold came forward
to relieve Betty of her burden, but she waved him imperiously
away, passed him and, opening the car-door, threw the bag at my
feet. Not one of the rough crowd moved a foot or uttered a sound,
save a baby in arms two doors off, who cut the silence with a
sickly wail and was immediately hushed by its mother. Betty turned
to the attendant Marigold.

"You can drive me home."

She sat by my side. Marigold took the wheel in front and drove on.
She sought for my hand, held it in an iron grip, and said not a
word. It was but a five minutes' run at the pace to which
Marigold, time-worn master of crises of life and death, put the
car. Betty held herself rigid, staring straight in front of her,
and striving in vain to stifle horrible little sounds that would
break through her tightly closed lips.

When we pulled up at her door she said queerly: "Forgive me. I'm a
damned little coward."

And she bolted from the car into the house.





CHAPTER XIII


Thus over the sequestered vale of Wellingsford, far away from the
sound of shells, even off the track of marauding Zeppelins, rode
the fiery planet. Mars. There is not a homestead in Great Britain
that in one form or another has not caught a reflection of its
blood-red ray. No matter how we may seek distraction in work or
amusement, the angry glow is ever before our eyes, colouring our
vision, colouring our thoughts, colouring our emotions for good or
for ill. We cannot escape it. Our personal destinies are
inextricably interwoven with the fate directing the death grapple
of the thousand miles or so of battle line, and arbitrating on the
doom of colossal battleships.

Our local newspaper prints week by week its ever-lengthening Roll
of Honour. The shells that burst and slew these brave fellows
spread their devastation into our little sheltered town; in a
thundering crash tearing off from the very trunk of life here a
friend, there a son, there a father, there a husband. And I
repeat, at the risk of wearisome insistence, that our sheltered
homeland shares the calm, awful fatalism of the battlefield; we
have to share it because every rood of our country is,
spiritually, as much a battlefield as the narrow, blood-sodden
wastes of Flanders and France.

Willie Connor, fine brave gentleman, was dead. My beloved Betty
was a widow. No Victoria Cross for Betty. Even if there had been
one, no children to be bred from birth on its glorious legend. The
German shell left Betty stripped and maimed. With her passionate
generosity she had given her all; even as his all had been nobly
given by her husband. And then all of both had been swept
ruthlessly away down the gory draught of sacrifice.

Poor Betty! "I'm a damned little coward," she said, as she bolted
into the house. The brave, foolish words rang in my ears all that
night. In the early morning I wondered what I should do. A
commonplace message, written or telephoned, would be inept. I
shrank from touching her, although I knew she would feel my touch
to be gentle. You have seen, I hope, that Betty was dearer to me
than anyone else in the world, and I knew that, apart from the
stirring emotions in her own young life, Betty held me in the
closest affection. When she needed me, she would fly the signal.
Of that I felt assured. Still...

While I was in this state of perplexity, Marigold came in to rouse
me and get me ready for the day.

"I've taken the liberty, sir," said he, "to telephone to Telford
Lodge to enquire after Mrs. Connor. The maid said she had Mrs.
Connor's instructions to reply that she was quite well."

The good, admirable fellow! I thanked him. While I was shaving, he
said in his usual wooden way:

"Begging your pardon, sir, I thought you might like to send Mrs.
Connor a few flowers, so I took upon myself to cut some roses,
first thing this morning, with the dew on them."

Of course I cut myself and the blood flowed profusely.

"Why the dickens do you spring things like that on people while
they're shaving?" I cried.

"Very sorry, sir," said he, solicitous with sponge and towel.

"All the same, Marigold," said I, "you've solved a puzzle that has
kept me awake since early dawn. We'll go out as soon as I'm
dressed and we'll send her every rose in the garden."

I have an acre or so of garden behind the house of which I have
not yet spoken, save incidentally--for it was there that just a
year ago poor Althea Fenimore ate her giant strawberries on the
last afternoon of her young life; and a cross-grained old
misanthropist, called Timbs, attends to it and lavishes on the
flowers the love which, owing, I suspect, to blighted early
affection, he denies to mankind. I am very fond of my garden and
am especially interested in my roses. Do you know an exquisitely
pink rose--the only true pink--named Mrs. George Norwood? ... I
bring myself up with a jerk. I am not writing a book on roses.
When the war is over perhaps I shall devote my old age to telling
you what I feel and know and think about them....

I had a battle with Timbs. Timbs was about sixty. He had shaggy,
bushy eyebrows over hard little eyes, a shaggy grey beard, and a
long, clean-shaven, obstinate upper lip. Stick him in an ill-
fitting frock coat and an antiquated silk hat, and he would be the
stage model of a Scottish Elder. As a matter of fact he was
Hampshire born and a devout Roman Catholic. But he was as crabbed
an old wretch as you can please. He flatly refused to execute my
order. I dismissed him on the spot. He countered with the
statement that he was an old man who had served me faithfully for
many years. I bade him go on serving me faithfully and not be a
damned fool. The roses were to be cut. If he didn't cut them,
Marigold would.

"He's been a-cutting them already," he growled. "Before I came."

Timbs loathed Marigold--why, I could never discover--and Marigold
had the lowest opinion of Timbs. It was an offence for Marigold to
desecrate the garden by his mere footsteps; to touch a plant or a
flower constituted a damnable outrage. On the other side, Timbs
could not approach my person for the purpose of rendering me any
necessary physical assistance, without incurring Marigold's
violent resentment.

"He'll go on cutting them," said I, "unless you start in at once."

He began. I sent off Marigold in search of a wheelbarrow. Then,
having Timbs to myself, I summoned him to my side.

"Do you hold with a man sacrificing his life for his country?"

He looked at me for a moment or two, in his dour, crabbed way.

"I've got a couple of sons in France, trying their best to do it,"
he replied.

That was the first I had ever heard of it. I had always regarded
him as a gnarled old bachelor without human ties. Where he had
kept the sons and the necessary mother I had not the remotest
notion.

"You're proud of them?"

"I am."

"And if one was killed, would you grudge his grave a few roses?
For the sake of him wouldn't you sacrifice a world of roses?"

His manner changed. "I don't understand, sir. Is anybody killed?"

"Didn't I say that all these roses were for Mrs. Connor?"

He dropped his secateur. "Good God, sir! Is it Captain Connor?"

The block-headed idiot of a Marigold had not told him! Marigold is
a very fine fellow, but occasionally he manifests human frailties
that are truly abominable.

"We are going to sacrifice all our roses, Timbs," said I, "for the
sake of a very gallant Englishman. It's about all we can do."

Of course I ought to have entered upon all this explanation when I
first came on the scene; but I took it for granted that Timbs knew
of the tragedy.

"Need we cut those blooms of the Rayon d'Or?" asked Timbs,
alluding to certain roses under conical paper shades which he had
been breathlessly tending for our local flower show. "We'll cut
them first," said I.

Looking back through the correcting prism of time, I fancy this
slaughter of the innocents may have been foolishly sentimental.
But I had a great desire to lay all that I could by way of tribute
of consolation at Betty's feet, and this little sacrifice of all
my roses seemed as symbolical an expression of my feelings as
anything that my unimaginative brain could devise.

During the forenoon I superintended the packing of the baskets of
roses in Pawling the florist's cart, which I was successful in
engaging for the occasion,--neither wheelbarrow nor donkey
carriage nor two-seater, the only vehicles at my disposal, being
adequate; and when I saw it start for its destination, I wheeled
myself, by way of discipline, through my bereaved garden. It
looked mighty desolate. But though all the blooms had gone, there
were a myriad buds which next week would burst into happy flower.
And the sacrifice seemed trivial, almost ironical; for in Betty's
heart there were no buds left.

After lunch I went to the hospital for the weekly committee
meeting. To my amazement the first person I met in the corridor
was Betty--Betty, white as wax, with black rings round unnaturally
shining eyes. She waited for me to wheel myself up to her. I said
severely:

"What on earth are you doing here? Go home to bed at once."

She put her hand on the back of my chair and bent down.

"I'm better here. And so are the dear roses. Come and see them."

I followed her into one of the military wards on the ground floor,
and the place was a feast of roses. I had no idea so many could
have come from my little garden. And the ward upstairs, she told
me, was similarly beflowered. By the side of each man's bed stood
bowl or vase, and the tables and the window sills were bright with
blooms. It was the ward for serious cases--men with faces livid
from gas-poisoning, men with the accursed trench nephritis, men
with faces swathed in bandages hiding God knows what distortions,
men with cradles over them betokening mangled limbs, men
recovering from operations, chiefly the picking of bits of
shrapnel and splinters of bone from shattered arms and legs; men
with pale faces, patient eyes, and with cheery smiles round their
lips when we passed by. A gramophone at the end of the room was
grinding out a sentimental tune to which all were listening with
rapt enjoyment. I asked one man, among others, how he was faring.
He was getting on fine. With the death-rattle in his throat the
wounded British soldier invariably tells you that he is getting on
fine.

"And ain't these roses lovely? Makes the place look like a garden.
And that music--seems appropriate, don't it, sir?"

I asked what the gramophone was playing. He looked respectfully
shocked.

"Why, it's 'The Rosary,' sir."

After we had left him, Betty said:

"That's the third time they've asked for it to-day. They've got
mixed up with the name, you see. They're beautiful children,
aren't they?"

I should have called them sentimental idiots, but Betty saw much
clearer than I did. She accompanied me back to the corridor and to
the Committee Room door. I was a quarter of an hour late.

"I've kept the precious Rayon d'Ors for myself," she said. "How
could you have the heart to cut them?"

"I would have cut out my heart itself, for the matter of that,"
said I, "if it would have done any good."

She smiled in a forlorn kind of way.

"Don't do that, for I shall want it inside you more than ever now.
Tell me, how is Tufton?"

"Tufton--?"

"Yes--Tufton."

I must confess that my mind being so full of Betty, I had clean
forgotten Tufton. But Betty remembered.

I smiled. "He's getting on fine," said I. I reached out my hand
and held her cold, slim fingers. "Promise me one thing, my dear."

"All right," she said.

"Don't overdo things. There's a limit to the power of bearing
strain. As soon as you feel you're likely to go FUT, throw it all
up and come and see me and let us lay our heads together."

"I despise people who go FUT," said Betty.

"I don't," said I.

We nodded a mutual farewell. She opened the Committee Room door
for me and walked down the corridor with a swinging step, as
though she would show me how fully she had made herself mistress
of circumstance.

Some evenings later she came in, as usual, unheralded, and
established herself by my chair.

The scents of midsummer came in through the open windows, and
there was a great full moon staring in at us from a cloudless sky.
Letters from the War Office, from brother-officers, from the
Colonel, from the Brigadier General himself, had broken her down.
She gave me the letters to read. Everyone loved him, admired him,
trusted him. "As brave as a lion," wrote one. "Perhaps the most
brilliant company officer in my brigade," wrote the General. And
his death--the tragic common story. A trench; a high-explosive
shell; the fate of young Etherington; and no possible little
wooden cross to mark his grave.

And Betty, on the floor by my side, gave way.

The proud will bent. She surrendered herself to a paroxysm of
sorrow.

She was not in a fit state to return to the hospital, where, I
learned, she shared a bedroom with Phyllis Gedge. I shrank from
sending her home to the tactless comforting of her aunts. They
were excellent, God-fearing ladies, but they had never understood
Betty. All her life they had worried her with genteel admonitions.
They had regarded her marriage with disfavour, as an act of
foolhardiness--I even think they looked on her attitude as
unmaidenly; and now in her frozen widowhood they fretted her past
endurance. On the night when the news came they sent for the vicar
of their parish--not my good friend who christened Hosea--a very
worthy, very serious, very evangelistically religious fellow, to
administer spiritual consolation. If Betty had sat devoutly under
him on Sundays, there might have been some reason in the summons.
But Betty, holding her own religious views, had only once been
inside the church--on the occasion of her wedding--and had but the
most formal acquaintance with the good man.... No, I could not
send Betty home, unexpectedly, to have her wounds mauled about by
unskilful fingers. Nothing remained but to telephone to the
hospital and put her in Mrs. Marigold's charge for the night. So
broken was my dear Betty, that she allowed herself to be carried
off without a word. ... Once before, years ago, she had behaved
with the same piteous docility; and that was when, a short-frocked
hoiden, she had fallen from an apple tree and badly hurt herself,
and Marigold had carried her into the house and Mrs. Marigold had
put her to bed. ...

In the morning I found her calm and sedate at the breakfast table.

"You've been and gone and done for both of us, Majy dear," she
remarked, pouring out tea.

"What do you mean?"

"Our reputations. What a scandal in Wellingsford!"

She looked me clearly in the eyes and smiled, and her hand did not
shake as she held my cup. And by these signs I knew that she had
taken herself again in grip and forbade reference to the agony
through which she had passed.

Quickly she turned the conversation to the Tuftons. What had
happened? I told her meagrely. She insisted on fuller details. So,
flogged by her, I related what I had gleaned from Marigold's
wooden reports. He always conveyed personal information as though
he were giving evidence against a defaulter. I had to start all
over again. Apparently this had happened: Mrs. Tufton had arrayed
herself, not in sackcloth and ashes, for that was apparently her
normal attire, but in an equivalent, as far as a symbol of
humility was concerned; namely, in decent raiment, and had sought
her husband's forgiveness. There had been a touching scene in the
scullery which Mrs. Marigold had given up to them for the sake of
privacy, in which the lady had made tearful promises of reform and
the corporal had magnanimously passed the sponge over the terrible
reckoning on her slate. Would he then go home to his penitent
wife? But the gallant fellow, with the sturdy common-sense for
which the British soldier is renowned, contrasted the clover in
which he was living here with the aridness of Flowery End, and
declined to budge. High sentiment was one thing, snug lying was
another. Next time he came back, if she had re-established the
home in its former comfort, he didn't say as how he wouldn't--

"But," she cried--and this bit I didn't tell Betty--"the next time
you may come home dead!"

"Then," replied Tufton, "let me see what a nice respectable
coffin, with brass handles and lots of slap-up brass nails and a
brass plate, you can get ready for me."

Since the first interview, I informed Betty, there had been others
daily--most decorous. They were excellent friends. Neither seemed
to perceive anything absurd in the situation. Even Marigold looked
on it as a matter of course.

"I have an idea," said Betty. "You know we want some help in the
servant staff of the hospital?"

I did. The matron had informed the Committee, who had empowered
her to act.

"Why not let me tackle Mrs. Tufton while she is in this
beautifully chastened and devotional mood? In this way we can get
her out of the mills, out of Flowery End, fill her up with noble
and patriotic emotions instead of whisky, and when Tufton returns,
present her to him as a model wife, sanctified by suffering and
ennobled by the consciousness of duty done. It would be splendid!"

For the first time since the black day there came a gleam of fun
into Betty's eyes and a touch of colour into her cheeks.

"It would indeed," said I. "The only question is whether Tufton
would really like this Red Cross Saint you'll have provided for
him."

"In case he does not," said Betty, "you can provide him with a
refuge as you are doing now."

She rose from the table, announcing her intention of going
straight to the hospital. I realised with a pang that breakfast
was over; that I had enjoyed a delectable meal; that, by some sort
of dainty miracle, she had bemused me into eating and drinking
twice my ordinary ration; that she had inveigled me into talking--
a thing I have never done during breakfast for years--it is as
much as Marigold's ugly head is worth to address a remark to me
during the unsympathetic duty--why, if my poached egg regards me
with too aggressive a pinkiness, I want to slap it--and into
talking about those confounded Tuftons with a gusto only provoked
by a glass or two of impeccable port after a good dinner. One
would have thought, considering the anguished scene of the night
before, that it would have been one of the most miserably
impossible tete-a-tete breakfasts in the whole range of such
notoriously ghastly meals. But here was Betty, serene and smiling,
as though she had been accustomed to breakfast with me every
morning of her life, off to the hospital, with a hard little idea
in her humorous head concerning Mrs. Tufton's conversion.

The only sign she gave of last night's storm was when, by way of
good-bye, she bent down and kissed my cheek.

"You know," she said, "I love you too much to thank you."

And she went off with her brave little head in the air.

In the afternoon I went to Wellings Park. Sir Anthony was away,
but Lady Fenimore was in. She showed me a letter she had received
from Betty in reply to her letter of condolence:

"My dears,

"It is good to realise one has such rocks to lean on. You long to
help and comfort me. Well, I'll tell you how to do it. You just
forget. Leave it to me to do all the remembering.

"Yours, Betty."





CHAPTER XIV


On the first of July there was forwarded to me from the club a
letter in an unknown handwriting. I had to turn to the signature
to discover the identity of my correspondent. It was Reggie Dacre,
Colonel Dacre, whom I had met in London a couple of months before.
As it tells its own little story, I transcribe it.

"Dear Major Meredyth:

"I should like to confirm by the following anecdote, which is
going the round of the Brigade, what I recently told you about our
friend Boyce. I shouldn't worry you, but I feel that if one has
cast an unjustifiable slur on a brother-officer's honour--and I
can't tell you how the thing has lain on my conscience--one
shouldn't leave a stone unturned to rehabilitate him, even in the
eyes of one person.

"There has been a good deal of scrapping around Ypres lately--that
given away by the communiques; but for reasons which both the
Censor and yourself will appreciate, I can't be more explicit as
to locality. Enough to say that somewhere in this region--or
sector, as we call it nowadays--there was a certain bit of ground
that had been taken and retaken over and over again. B.'s Regiment
was in this fighting, and at one particular time we were holding a
German front trench section. A short distance further on the enemy
held a little farm building, forming a sort of redoubt. They
sniped all day long. They also had a machine gun. I can't give you
accurate details, for I can only tell you what I've heard; but the
essentials are true. Well, we got that farmhouse. We got it
single-handed. Boyce put up the most amazing bluff that has ever
happened in this war. He crawls out by himself, without anybody
knowing--it was a pitch-black night--gets through the barbed
wire, heaven knows how, up to the house; lays a sentry out with
his life-preserver; gives a few commands to an imaginary company;
and summons the occupants--two officers and fifteen men--to
surrender. Thinking they are surrounded, they obey like lambs,
come out unarmed, with their hands up, officers and all, and are
comfortably marched off in the dark, as prisoners into our
trenches. They say that when the German officers discovered how
they had been done, they foamed so hard that we had to use empty
sandbags as strait waistcoats.

"Now, it's picturesque, of course, and being picturesque, it has
flown from mouth to mouth. But it's true. Verb. sap.

"Hoping some time or other to see you again,
"Yours sincerely,
"R. DACRE,
"Lt. Col."

I quote this letter here for the sake of chronological sequence.
It gave me a curious bit of news. No man could have performed such
a feat without a cold brain, soundly beating heart, and nerves of
steel. It was not an act of red-hot heroism. It was done in cold
blood, a deliberate gamble with death on a thousand to one chance.
It was staggeringly brave.

I told the story to Mrs. Boyce. Her comment was characteristic:

"But surely they would have to surrender if called upon by a
British Officer."

To the Day of Judgment I don't think she will understand what
Leonard did. Leonard himself, coming home slightly wounded two or
three weeks afterwards, pooh-poohed the story as one of no account
and only further confused the dear lady's ill-conceived notions.

In the meanwhile life at Wellingsford flowed uneventfully. Now and
again a regiment or a brigade, having finished its training,
disappeared in a night, and the next day fresh troops arrived to
fill its place. And this great, silent movement of men went on all
over the country. Sometimes our hearts sank. A reserve Howitzer
Territorial Brigade turned up in Wellings Park with dummy wooden
guns. The officers told us that they had been expecting proper
guns daily for the past two months. Marigold shook a sad head. But
all things, even six-inch howitzers, come to him who waits.

Little more was heard of Randall Holmes. He corresponded with his
mother through a firm of London solicitors, and his address and
his doings remained a mystery. He was alive, he professed robust
health, and in reply to Mrs. Holmes's frantically expressed hope
that he was adopting no course that might discredit his father's
name, he twitted her with intellectual volte-face to the views of
Philistia, but at the same time assured her that he was doing
nothing which the most self-righteous bourgeois would consider
discreditable.

"But it IS discreditable for him to go away like this and not let
his own mother know where he is," cried the poor woman.

And of course I agreed with her. I find it best always to agree
with mothers; also with wives.

After her own lapse from what Mrs. Boyce would have called
"Spartianism," Betty kept up her brave face. When Willie Connor's
kit came home she told me tearlessly about the heartrending
consignment. Now and then she spoke of him--with a proud look in
her eyes. She was one of the women of England who had the
privilege of being the wife of a hero. In this world one must pay
for everything worth having. Her widowhood was the price. All the
tears of a lifetime could not bring him back. All the storms of
fate could not destroy the glory of those few wonderful months. He
was laughing, so she heard, when he met his death. So would she,
in honour of him, go on laughing till she met hers.

"And that silly little fool, Phyllis, is still crying her eyes out
over Randall," she said. "Don't I think she was wrong in sending
him away? If she had married him she might have influenced him,
made him get a commission in the army. I've threatened to beat her
if she talks such nonsense. Why can't people take a line and stick
to it?"

"This isn't a world of Bettys, my dear," said I.

"Rubbish! The outrageous Mrs. Tufton's doing it."

Apparently she was. She followed Betty about as the lamb followed
Mary. Tufton, after a week or two at Wellington Barracks, had been
given sergeant's stripes and sent off with a draft to the front.
Betty's dramatic announcement of her widowhood seemed to have put
the fear of death into the woman's soul. As soon as her husband
landed in France she went scrupulously through the closely printed
casualty lists of non-commissioned officers and men in The Daily
Mail, in awful dread lest she should see her husband's name. Betty
vainly assured her that, in the first place, she would hear from
the War Office weeks before anything could appear in the papers,
and that, in the second, his name would occur under the heading
"Grenadier Guards," and not under "Royal Field Artillery," "Royal
Engineers," "Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry," "R.A.M.C.," or
Australian and Canadian contingents. Mrs. Tufton went through the
lot from start to finish. Once, indeed, she came across the name,
in big print, and made a bee-line through the wards for Betty--an
offence for which the Matron nearly threw her, there and then,
into the street. It was that of the gallant Colonel of a New
Zealand Regiment at Gallipoli. Betty had to point to the brief
biographical note to prove to the distracted woman that the late
Colonel Tufton of New Zealand could not be identical with Sergeant
Tufton of the Grenadiers. She regarded Mrs. Tufton as a brand she
had plucked from the burning and took a great deal of trouble with
her. On the other hand, I imagine Mrs. Tufton looked upon herself
as a very important person, a sergeant's wife, and the
confidential intimate of a leading sister at the Wellingsford
Hospital. In fact, Marigold mentioned her notorious vanity.

"What does it matter," cried Betty, when I put this view before
her, "how swelled her head may be, so long as it isn't swollen
with drink?"

And I could find no adequate reply.

Towards the end of the month comes Boyce to Wellingsford, this
time not secretly; for the day after his arrival he drove his
mother through the town and incidentally called on me. A neglected
bullet graze on the neck had turned septic. An ugly temperature
had sent him to hospital. The authorities, as soon as the fever
had abated and left him on the high road to recovery, had sent him
home. A khaki bandage around his bull-throat alone betokened
anything amiss. He would be back, he said, as soon as the Medical
Board at the War Office would let him.

On this occasion, for the first time since South African days, I
met him without any mistrust. What had passed between Betty and
himself, I did not know. Relations between man and woman are so
subtle and complicated, that unless you have the full pleadings on
both sides in front of you, you cannot arbitrate; and, as often as
not, if you deliver the most soul-satisfying of judgments, you are
hopelessly wrong, because there are all important, elusive factors
of personality, temperament, sex, and what not which all the legal
acumen in the world could not set down in black and white. So half
unconsciously I ruled out Betty from my contemplation of the man.
I had been obsessed by the Vilboek Farm story, and by that alone.
Reggie Dacre--to say nothing of personages in high command--had
proved it to be a horrible lie. He had Marshal Ney's deserved
reputation--le brave des braves--and there is no more coldly
critical conferrer of such repute than the British Army in the
field. To win it a man not only has to do something heroic once or
twice--that is what he is there for--but he has to be doing it all
the time. Boyce had piled up for himself an amazing record, one
that overwhelmed the possibility of truth in old slanders. When I
gripped him by the hand, I felt immeasurable relief at being able
to do so without the old haunting suspicion and reservation.

He spoke, like thousands of others of his type--the type of the
fine professional English soldier--with diffident modesty of such
personal experiences as he deigned to recount. The anecdotes
mostly had a humorous side, and were evoked by allusion. Like all
of us stay-at-homes, I cursed the censorship for leaving us so
much in the dark. He laughed and cursed the censorship for the
opposite reason.

"The damned fools--I beg your pardon, Mother, but when a fool is
too big a fool even for this world, he must be damned--the damned
fools allow all sorts of things to be given away. They were nearly
the death of me and were the death of half a dozen of my men."

And he told the story. In a deserted brewery behind the lines the
vats were fitted up as baths for men from the trenches, and the
furnaces heated ovens in which horrible clothing was baked. This
brewery had been immune from attack until an officially sanctioned
newspaper article specified its exact position. A few days after
the article appeared, in fact, as soon as a copy of the paper
reached Germany, a thunderstorm of shells broke on the brewery.
Out of it poured a helter-skelter stream of stark-naked men, who
ran wherever they could for cover. From one point of view it was
vastly comic. In the meanwhile the building containing all their
clothes, and all the spare clothing for a brigade, was being
scientifically destroyed. That was more comic still. The bather
cut off from his garments is a world-wide joke. The German
battery, having got the exact range, were having a systematic,
Teutonic afternoon's enjoyment. But from another point of view the
situation was desperate. There were these poor fellows, hordes of
them, in nature's inadequate protection against the weather,
shivering in the cold, with the nearest spare rag of clothing some
miles away. Boyce got them together, paraded them instantly under
the shell fire, and led them at a rush into the blazing building
to salve stores. Six never came out alive. Many were burned and
wounded. But it had to be done, or the whole crowd would have
perished from exposure. Tommy is fairly tough; but he cannot live
mother-naked through a March night of driving sleet.

"No," said Boyce, "if you suffered daily from the low cunning of
Brother Bosch, you wouldn't cry for things to be published in the
newspapers."

At the end of their visit I accompanied my guests to the hall.
Marigold escorted Mrs. Boyce to the car. Leonard picked up his cap
and cane and turned to shake hands. I noticed that the knob of the
cane was neatly cased in wash-leather. Idly I enquired the reason.
He smiled grimly as he slipped off the cover and exposed the
polished deep vermilion butt of the life-preserver which Reggie
Dacre had described.

"It's a sort of fetish I feel I must carry around with me," he
explained. "When I've got it in my hand, I don't seem to care a
damn what I do. When I haven't, I miss it. Remember the story of
Sir Walter Scott's boy with the butter? Something like that, you
know. But in its bare state it's not a pretty sight for the
mother."

"It ought to have a name," said I. "The poilu calls his bayonet
Rosalie."

He looked at it darkly for a moment, before refitting the wash-
leather.

"I might call it The Reminder," said he. "Good-bye." And he
turned quickly and strode out of the door.

The Reminder of what? He puzzled me. Why, in spite of all my open-
heartedness, did he still contrive to leave me with a sense of the
enigmatic?

Although he showed himself openly about the town, he held himself
aloof from social intercourse with the inhabitants. He called, I
know, on Mrs. Holmes, and on one or two others who have no place
in this chronicle. But he refused all proposals of entertainment,
notably an invitation to dinner from the Fenimores. Sir Anthony
met him in the street, upbraided him in his genial manner for
neglect of his old friends, and pressingly asked him to dine at
Wellings Park. Just a few old friends. The duties of a
distinguished soldier, said he, did not begin and end on the
field. He must uplift the hearts of those who had to stay at home.
Sir Anthony had a nervous trick of rattling off many sentences
before his interlocutor could get in a word. When he had finished,
Boyce politely declined the invitation.

"And with a damned chilly, stand-offish politeness," cried Sir
Anthony furiously, when telling me about it. "Just as if I had
been Perkins, the fish-monger, asking him to meet the Prettiloves
at high tea. It's swelled head, my dear chap; that's what it is.
Just swelled head. None of us are good enough for him and his
laurels. He's going to remain the modest mossy violet of a hero
blushing unseen. Oh, damn the fellow!"

I did my best to soothe my touchy and choleric friend. No soldier,
said I, likes to be made a show of. Why had he suggested a dinner
party? A few friends. Anyone in Boyce's position knew what that
meant. It meant about thirty gawking, gaping people for whom he
didn't care a hang. Why hadn't Anthony asked the Boyces to dine
quietly with Edith and himself--with me thrown in, for instance,
if they wanted exotic assistance? Let me try, I said, to fix
matters up.

So the next day I called on Boyce and told him, with such tact as
I have at command, of Sir Anthony's wounded feelings.

"My dear Meredyth," said he. "I can only say to you what I tried
to explain to the irascible little man. If I accepted one
invitation, I should have to accept all invitations or give
terrible offence all over the place. I'm here a sick man and my
mother's an invalid. And I merely want to be saved from my friends
and have a quiet time with the old lady. Of course if Sir Anthony
is offended, I'm only too sorry, and I beg you to assure him that
I never intended the slightest discourtesy. The mere idea of it
distresses me."

The explanation was reasonable, the apology frank. Sir Anthony
received them both grumpily. He had his foibles. He set his
invitations to dinner in a separate category from those of the
rag-tag and bobtail of Wellingsford society. So for the sake of
principle he continued to damn the fellow.

On the other hand, for the sake of principle, reparation for
injustice, I continued to like the fellow and found pleasure in
his company. For one thing, I hankered after the smoke and smell
and din of the front, and Boyce succeeded more than anyone else in
satisfying my appetite. While he talked, as he did freely with me
alone, I got near to the grim essence of things. Also, with the
aid of rough military maps, he made actions and strategical
movements of which newspaper accounts had given me but a confused
notion, as clear as if I had been a chief of staff. Often he went
to considerable trouble in obtaining special information. He
appeared to set himself out to win my esteem. Now a cripple is
very sensitive to kindness. I could not reject his overtures. What
interested motive could he have in seeking out a useless hulk like
me? On the first opportunity I told Betty of the new friendship,
having a twinge or two of conscience lest it might appear to her
disloyal.

"But why in the world shouldn't you see him, dear?" she said,
open-eyed. "He brings the breath of battle to you and gives you
fresh life. You're looking ever so much better the last few days.
The only thing is," she added, turning her head away, "that I
don't want to run the risk of meeting him again."

Naturally I took precautions against such an occurrence. The
circumstances of their last meeting at my house lingered
unpleasantly in my mind. Perhaps, for Betty's sake, I ought to
have turned a cold shoulder on Boyce. But when you have done a man
a foul injustice for years, you must make him some kind of secret
reparation. So, by making him welcome, I did what I could.

Now I don't know whether I ought to set down a trivial incident
mentioned in my diary under the date of the 15th August, the day
before Boyce left Wellingsford to join his regiment in France. In
writing an account of other people's lives it is difficult to know
what to put in and what to leave out. If you bring in your own
predilections or prejudices or speculations concerning them, you
must convey a distorted impression. You lie about them
unconsciously. A fact is a fact, and, if it is important, ought to
be recorded. But when you are not sure whether it is a fact or
not, what are you to do?

Perhaps I had better narrate what happened and tell you afterwards
why I hesitate.

Marigold had driven me over to Godbury, where I had business
connected with a County Territorial Association, and we were
returning home. It was a moist, horrible, depressing August day. A
slimy, sticky day. Clouds hung low over the reeking earth. The
honest rain had ceased, but wet drops dribbled from the leaves of
the trees and the branches and trunks exuded moisture. The
thatched roofs of cottages were dank. In front gardens roses and
hollyhocks drooped sodden. The very droves of steers coming from
market sweated in the muggy air. The good slush of the once dusty
road, broken to bits by military traffic, had stiffened into black
grease. Round a bend of the road we skidded alarmingly. Marigold
has a theory that in summer time a shirt next the skin is the only
wear for humans and square-tread tyres the only wear for motor-
cars. With some acerbity I pointed out the futility of his
proposition. With the blandness of superior wisdom he assured me
that we were perfectly safe. You can't knock into the head of an
artilleryman who has been trained to hang on to a limber by the
friction of his trousers, that there can be any danger in the
luxurious seat of a motor-car.

There is a good straight half mile of the Godbury Road which is
known in the locality as "The Gut." It is sunken and very narrow,
being flanked on one side by the railway embankment, and on the
other by the grounds of Godbury Chase. A most desolate bit of
road, half overhung by trees and oozing with all the moisture of
the country-side. On this day it was the wettest, slimiest bit of
road in England. We had almost reached the end of it, when it
entered the head of a stray puppy dog to pause in the act of
crossing and sit down in the middle and hunt for fleas. To spare
the abominable mongrel, Marigold made a sudden swerve. Of course
the car skidded. It skidded all over the place, as if it were
drunk, and, aided by Marigold, described a series of ghastly half-
circles. At last he performed various convulsive feats of
jugglery, with the result that the car, which was nosing steadily
for the ditch, came to a stand-still. Then Marigold informed me
in unemotional tones that the steering gear had gone.

"It's all the fault of that there dog," said he, twisting his head
so as to glare at the little beast, who, after a yelp and a bound,
had calmly recaptured his position and resumed his interrupted
occupation.

"It's all the fault of that there Marigold," I retorted, "who
can't see the sense of using studded tyres on a greasy surface.
What's to be done now?"

Marigold thrust his hand beneath his wig and scratched his head.
He didn't exactly know. He got out and stared intently at the car.
If mind could have triumphed over matter, the steering gear would
have become disfractured. But the good Marigold's mind was not
powerful enough. He gave up the contest and looked at me and the
situation. There we were, broadside on to the narrow road, and
only manhandling could bring us round to a position of safety by
the side. He was for trying it there and then; but I objected,
having no desire to be slithered into the ditch.

"I would just as soon," said I, "ride a giraffe shod with roller
skates."

He didn't even smile. He turned his one reproachful eye on me.
What was to be done? I told him. We must wait for assistance. When
I had been transferred into the vehicle of a passing Samaritan, it
was time enough for the manhandling.

Fate brought the Samaritan very quickly. A car coming from Godbury
tooted violently, then slowed down, stopped, and from it jumped
Leonard Boyce. As he was to rescue me from a position of peculiar
helplessness, I regarded his great khaki-clad figure as that of a
ministering angel. I beamed on him.

"Hallo! What's the matter?" he asked cheerily.

I explained. Being merciful, I spared Marigold and threw the blame
on the dog and on the County Council for allowing the roads to get
into such a filthy condition.

"That's all right," said Boyce. "We'll soon fix you up. First
we'll get you into my car. Then Marigold and I will slue this one
round, and then we'll send him a tow."

Marigold nodded and approached to lift me out.

Then, what happened next, happened in the flash of a few
breathless seconds. There was the dull thud of hoofs. A scared bay
thoroughbred, coming from Godbury, galloping hell for leather,
with a dishevelled boy in khaki on his back. The boy had lost his
stirrups; he had lost his reins; he had lost his head. He hung
half over the saddle and had a death grip on the horse's mane. And
the uncontrolled brute was thundering down on us. There was my
infernal car barring the narrow road. I remember bracing myself to
meet the shock. An end, thought I, of Duncan Meredyth. I saw Boyce
leap aside like a flash and appear to stand stock-still. The next
second I saw Marigold semaphore a few yards in front of the car
and then swing sickeningly at the horse's bit; and then the whole
lot of them, Marigold, horse and rider, come down in a convulsive
heap on the greasy road. To my intense relief I saw Marigold pick
himself up and go to the head of the plunging, prostrate horse. In
a moment or two he had got the beast on his feet, where he stood
quivering. It was a fine, smart piece of work on the part of the
old artilleryman. I was so intent on his danger that I forgot all
about Boyce: but as soon as the three crashed down, I saw him run
to assist the young subaltern who had rolled himself clear.

"By Jove, that was a narrow shave!" he cried cordially, giving him
a hand.

"It was indeed, sir," said the young man, scraping the mud off his
face. "That's the second time the brute has done it. He shies and
bucks and kicks like a regular devil. This time he shied at a
steam lorry and bucked my feet out of the stirrups. Everybody in
the squadron has turned him down, and I'm the junior, I've had to
take him." He eyed the animal resentfully. "I'd just like to get
him on some grass and knock hell out of him!"

"I'm glad to see you're not hurt," said Boyce with a smile.

"Oh, not a bit, sir," said the boy. He turned to Marigold. "I
don't know how to thank you. It was a jolly plucky thing to do.
You've saved my life and that of the gentleman in the car. If we
had busted into it, there would have been pie." He came to the
side of the car. "I think you're Major Meredyth, sir. I must have
given you an awful fright. I'm so sorry. My name is Brown. I'm in
the South Scottish Horse."

He had a courteous charm of manner in spite of his boyish desire
to appear unshaken by the accident. A little bravado is an
excellent thing. I laughed and held out my hand.

"I'm glad to meet you--although our meeting might have been
contrived less precipitously. This is Sergeant Marigold, late
R.F.A., who does me the honour of looking after me. And this is
Major Boyce."

Observe the little devil of malice that made me put Marigold
first.

"Of the Rifles?"

A quick gleam of admiration showed in the boy's eyes as he
saluted. No soldier could be stationed at Wellingsford without
hearing of the hero of the neighbourhood. A great hay waggon came
lumbering down the road and pulled up, there being no room for it
to pass. This put an end to social amenities. Brown mounted his
detested charger and trotted off. Marigold transferred me to
Boyce's car. Several pairs of brawny arms righted the two-seater
and Boyce and I drove off, leaving Marigold waiting with his usual
stony patience for the promised tow. On the way Boyce talked gaily
of Marigold's gallantry, of the boy's spirit, of the idiotic way
in which impossible horses were being foisted on newly formed
cavalry units. When we drew up at my front door, it occurred to me
that there was no Marigold in attendance.

"How the deuce," said I, "am I going to get out?"

Boyce laughed. "I don't think I'll drop you."

His great arms picked me up with ease. But while he was carrying
me I experienced a singular physical revolt. I loathed his grip. I
loathed the enforced personal contact. Even after he had deposited
me--very skilfully and gently--in my wheel-chair in the hall, I
hated the lingering sense of his touch. He owed his whisky and
soda to the most elementary instinct of hospitality. Besides, he
was off the next day, back to the trenches and the hell of battle,
and I had to bid him good-bye and God-speed. But when he went, I
felt glad, very glad, as though relieved of some dreadful
presence. My old distrust and dislike returned increased a
thousandfold.

It was only when he got my frail body in his arms, which I
realized were twice as strong as my good Marigold's, that I felt
the ghastly and irrational revulsion. The only thing to which I
can liken it, although it seems ludicrous, is what I imagine to be
the instinctive recoil of a woman who feels on her body the touch
of antipathetic hands. I know that my malady has made me a bit
supersensitive. But my vanity has prided itself on keeping up a
rugged spirit in a fool of a body, so I hated myself for giving
way to morbid sensations. All the same, I felt that if I were
alone in a burning house, and there were no one but Leonard Boyce
to save me, I should prefer incineration to rescue.

And now I will tell you why I have hesitated to give a place in
this chronicle to the incident of the broken-down car and the
runaway horse.

It all happened so quickly, my mind was so taken up with the
sudden peril, that for the life of me I cannot swear to the part
played by Leonard Boyce. I saw him leap aside, and had the
fragment of an impression of him standing motionless between the
radiator of his car and the tail of mine which was at right
angles. The next time he thrust himself on my consciouness was
when he was lugging young Brown out of reach of the convulsive
hoofs. In the meanwhile Marigold, single-handed, had rushed into
the jaws of death and stopped the horse. But as it was a matter of
seconds, I had no reason for believing that, but for adventitious
relative positions on the road, Boyce would not have done the
same. ... And yet out of the corner of my eye I got an
instantaneous photograph of him standing bolt upright between the
two cars, while the abominable bay brute, with distended red
nostrils and wild eyes, was thundering down on us.

On the other hand, the swift pleasure in the boy's eyes when he
realised that he was in the presence of the popular hero, proved
him free of doubts such as mine. And when Marigold, having put the
car in hospital, came to make his report, and lingered in order to
discuss the whole affair, he said, in wooden deprecation of my
eulogy:

"If Major Boyce hadn't jumped in, sir, young Mr. Brown's head
would have been kicked into pumpkin-squash."

Well, I have known from long experience that there are no more
untrustworthy witnesses than a man's own eyes; especially in the
lightning dramas of life.

I was kept awake all night, and towards the dawn I came into
thorough agreement with Sir Anthony and I heartily damned the
fellow.

What had I to do with him that he should rob me of my sleep?





CHAPTER XV


The next morning he strode in while I was at breakfast, handsome,
erect, deep-chested, the incarnation of physical strength, with a
glad light in his eyes.

"Congratulate me, old man," he cried, gripping my frail shoulder.
"I've three days' extra leave. And more than that, I go out in
command of the regiment. No temporary business but permanent rank.
Gazetted in due course. Bannatyne--that's our colonel--damned good
soldier!--has got a staff appointment. I take his place. I promise
you the Fourth King's Rifles are going to make history. Either
history or manure. History for choice. As I say, Bannatyne's a
damned good soldier, and personally as brave as a lion, but when
it comes to the regiment, he's too much on the cautious side. The
regiment's only longing to make things hum, and I'm going to let
'em do it."

I congratulated him in politely appropriate terms and went on with
my bacon and eggs. He sat on the window-seat and tapped his
gaiters with his cane life-preserver. He wore his cap.

"I thought you'd like to know," said he. "You've been so good to
the old mother while I've been away and been so charitable,
listening to my yarns, while I've been here, that I couldn't
resist coming round and telling you."

"I suppose your mother's delighted," said I.

He threw back his head and laughed, as though he had never a black
thought or memory in the world.

"Dear old mater! She has the impression that I'm going out to take
charge of the blessed campaign. So if she talks about 'my dear
son's army,' don't let her down, like a good chap--for she'll
think either me a fraud or you a liar."

He rose suddenly, with a change of expression.

"You're the only man in the world I could talk to like this about
my mother. You know the sterling goodness and loyalty that lies
beneath her funny little ways."

He strode to the window which looks out on to the garden, his back
turned on me. And there he stood silent for a considerable time. I
helped myself to marmalade and poured out a second cup of tea.
There was no call for me to speak. I had long realized that,
whatever may have been the man's sins and weaknesses, he had a
very deep and tender love for the Dresden china old lady that was
his mother. There was London of the clubs and the theatres and the
restaurants and the night-clubs, a war London full and alive, not
dead as in Augusts of far-off tradition, all ready to give him
talk and gaiety and the things that matter to the man who escapes
for a brief season from the never-ending hell of the battlefield;
ready, too, to pour flattery into his ear, to touch his scars with
the softest of its lingers. Yet he chose to stay, a recluse, in
our dull little town, avoiding even the kindly folk round about,
in order to devote himself to one dear but entirely uninteresting
old woman. It is not that he despised London, preferring the life
of the country gentleman. On the contrary, before the war Leonard
Boyce was very much the man about town. He loved the glitter and
the chatter of it. From chance words during this spell of leave, I
had divined hankering after its various fleshpots. For the sake of
one old woman he made reckless and gallant sacrifice. When he was
bored to misery he came round to me. I learned later that in
visiting Wellingsford he faced more than boredom. All of this you
must put to the credit side of his ledger.

There he stood, his great broad shoulders and bull-neck
silhouetted against the window. That broad expanse, a bit fleshy,
below the base of the skull indicates brutality. Never before, to
my eyes, had the sign asserted itself with so much aggression. I
had often wondered why, apart from the Vilboek Farm legend, I had
always disliked and distrusted him. Now I seemed to know. It was
the neck not of a man, but of a brute. The curious repulsion of
the previous evening, when he had carried me into the house, came
over me again. From junction of arm and body protruded six inches
of the steel-covered life-preserver, the washleather that hid its
ghastly knob staring at me blankly. I hated the thing. The gallant
English officer--and in my time I have known and loved a many of
the most gallant--does not go about in private life fondling a
trophy reeking with the blood of his enemies. It is the trait of a
savage. That truculent knob and that truculent bull-neck
correlated themselves most horribly in my mind. And again, with a
shiver, I had the haunting flash of a vision of him, out of the
tail of my eye, standing rigid and gaping between the two cars,
while my rugged old Marigold, in a businesslike, old-soldier sort
of way, without thought of danger or death, was swaying at the
head of the runaway horse.

Presently he turned, and his brows were set above unfathomable
hard eyes. The short-cropped moustache could not hide the curious
twitch of the lips which I had seen once before. It was obvious
that these few minutes of silence had been spent in deep thought
and had resulted in a decision. A different being from the gay,
successful soldier who had come in to announce his honours
confronted me. He threw down cap and stick and passed his hand
over his crisp brown hair.

"I don't know whether you're a friend of mine or not," he said,
hands on hips and gaitered legs slightly apart. "I've never been
able to make out. All through our intercourse, in spite of your
courtesy and hospitality, there has been some sort of reservation
on your part."

"If that is so," said I, diplomatically, "it is because of the
defects of my national quality."

"That's possibly what I've felt," said he. "But it doesn't matter
a damn with regard to what I want to say. It's a question not of
your feelings towards me, but my feelings towards you. I don't
want to make polite speeches--but you're a man whom I have every
reason to honour and trust. And unlike all my other brother-
officers, you have no reason to be jealous--"

"My dear fellow," I interrupted, "what's all this about? Why
jealousy?"

"You know what a pot-hunter is in athletics? A chap that is simply
out for prizes? Well, that's what a lot of them think of me. That
I'm just out to get orders and medals and distinctions and so
forth."

"That's nonsense," said I. "I happen to know. Your reputation in
the brigade is unassailable."

"In the way of my having done what I'm credited with, it is," he
answered. "But all the same, they're right."

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"What I say. They're right. I'm out for everything I can get. Now
I'm out for a V.C. I see you think it abominable. That's because
you don't understand. No one but I myself could understand. I feel
I owe it to myself." He looked at me for a second or two and then
broke into a sardonic sort of laugh. "I suppose you think me a
conceited ass," he continued. "Why should Leonard Boyce be such a
vastly important person? It isn't that, I assure you."

I lit a cigarette, having waved an invitation to join me, which
with a nod he refused.

"What is it, then?"

"Has it ever struck you that often a man's most merciless creditor
is himself?"

Here was a casuistical proposition thrown at my head by the last
person I should have suspected of doing so. It was immensely
interesting, in view of my long puzzledom. I spoke warily.

"That depends on the man--on the nice balance of his dual nature.
On the one side is the power to demand mercilessly; on the other,
the instinct to respond. Of course, the criminal--"

"What are you dragging in criminals for?" he said sharply. "I'm
talking about honourable men with consciences. Criminals haven't
consciences. The devil who has just been hung for murdering three
women in their baths hadn't any dual nature, as you call it. Those
murders didn't represent to him a mountain of debt to God which
his soul was summoned to discharge. He went to his death thinking
himself a most unlucky and hardly used fellow."

His fingers went instinctively into the cigarette-box. I passed
him the matches.

"Precisely," said I. "That was the point I was about to make."

He puffed at his cigarette and looked rather foolish, as though
regretting his outburst.

"We've got away," he said, after a pause, "from what I was meaning
to tell you. And I want to tell you because I mayn't have another
chance." He turned to the window-seat and picked up his life-
preserver. "I'm out for two things. One is to kill Germans--" He
patted the covered knob--and there flashed across my mind a
boyhood's memory of Martin--wasn't it Martin?--in "Hereward the
Wake," who had a deliciously blood-curdling habit of patting his
revengeful axe.--"I've done in eighty-five with this and my
revolver. That, I consider, is my duty to my country. The other is
to get the V.C. That's for payment to my creditor self."

"In full, or on account?" said I.

"There's only one payment in full," he answered grimly, "and that
I've been offering for the past twelve months. And it's a thousand
chances to one it will be accepted before the end of this year.
And that, after all this palaver, is what I've just made up my
mind to talk to you about."

"You mean your death?"

"Just that," said he. "A man pot-hunting for Victoria Crosses
takes a thousand to one chance." He paused abruptly and shot an
eager and curiously wavering glance at me. "Am I boring you with
all this?"

"Good Heavens, no." And then as the insistence of his great figure
towering over me had begun to fret my nerves--"Sit down, man,"
said I, with an impatient gesture, "and put that sickening toy
away and come to the point."

He tossed the cane on the window-seat and sat near me on a
straight-backed chair.

"All right," he said. "I'll come to the point. I shan't see you
again. I'm going out in command. Thank God we're in the thick of
it. Round about Loos. It's a thousand to one I'll be killed. Life
doesn't matter much to me, in spite of what you may think. There
are only two people on God's earth I care for. One, of course, is
my old mother. The other is Betty Fairfax--I mean Betty Connor. I
spoke to you once about her--after I had met her here--and I gave
you to understand that I had broken off our engagement from
conscientious motives. It was an awkward position and I had to say
something. As a matter of fact I acted abominably. But I couldn't
help it." The corners of his lips suddenly worked in the odd
little twitch. "Sometimes circumstances, especially if a man's own
damn foolishness has contrived them, tie him hand and foot.
Sometimes physical instincts that he can't control." He narrowed
his eyes and bent forward, looking at me intently, and he repeated
the phrase slowly--"Physical instincts that he can't control-"

Was he referring to the incident of yesterday? I thought so. I
also believed it was the motive power of this strangely intimate
conversation.

He rose again as though restless, and once more went to the window
and seemed to seek inspiration or decision from the sight of my
roses. After a short while he turned and dragged up from his neck
a slim chain at the end of which hung a round object in a talc
case. This he unfastened and threw on the table in front of me.

"Do you know what that is?"

"Yes," said I. "Your identification disc."

"Look on the other side."

I took it up and found that the reverse contained the head cut out
from some photograph of Betty. After I had handed back the locket,
he slipped it on the chain and dropped it beneath his collar.

"I'm not a damned fool," said he.

I nodded understandingly. No one would have accused him of mawkish
sentiment. The woman whose portrait he wore night and day next his
skin was the woman he loved. He had no other way of proving his
sincerity than by exhibiting the token.

"I see," said I. "What do you propose to do?"

"I've told you. The V.C. or--" He snapped his fingers.

"But if it's the V.C. and a Brigade, and perhaps a Division--if
it's everything else imaginable except--"I snapped my fingers in
imitation--"What then?"

Again the hateful twitch of the lips, which he quickly
dissimulated in a smile.

"I'll begin to try to be a brave man." He lit another cigarette.
"But all that, my dear Meredyth," he continued, "is away from the
point. If I live, I'll ask you to forget this rotten palaver. But
I have a feeling that I shan't come back. Something tells me that
my particular form of extermination will be a head knocked into
slush. I'm absolutely certain that I shall never see you again.
Oh, I'm not morbid," he said, as I raised a protesting hand.
"You're an old soldier and know what these premonitions are. When
I came in--before I had finally made up my mind to pan out to you
like this--I felt like a boy who has been made captain of the
school. But all the same, I know I shan't see you again. So I want
you to promise me two things--quite honourable and easy."

"Of course, my dear fellow," said I rather tartly, for I did not
like the wind-up of his sentence. It was unthinkable that an
officer and a gentleman should inveigle a brother-officer into a
solemn promise to do anything dishonourable. "Of course. Anything
you like."

"One is to look after the old mother--"

"That goes without promising," said I.

"The other is to--what shall I say?--to rehabilitate my memory in
the eyes of Betty Connor. She may hear all kinds of things about
me--some true, others false--I have my enemies. She has heard
things already. I didn't know it till our last meeting here.
There's no one else on God's earth can do what I want but you. Do
you think I'm putting you into an impossible position?"

"I don't think so," said I. "Go on."

"Well--there's not much more to be said. Try to make her realise
that, whatever may be my faults--my crimes, if it comes to that--
I've done my damndest out there to make reparation. By God! I
have," he cried, in a sudden flash of passion. "See that she
realises it. And--" he thumped the hidden identification disc,
"tell her that she is the only woman that has ever really mattered
in the whole of my blasted life."

He threw his half-smoked cigarette into the fire-place and walked
over to the sideboard, where stood decanters and syphon.

"May I help myself to a drink?"

"Certainly," said I.

He gulped down half a whisky and soda and turned on me.

"You promise?"

"Of course," said I.

"She may have reasons to think the worst of me. But whatever I am
there is some good in me. I'm not altogether a worthless hound. If
you promise to make her think the best of me, I'll go away happy.
I don't care a damn whether I die or live. That's the truth. As
long as I'm alive I can take care of myself. I'm not dreaming of
asking you to say a word to win her favour. That would be
outrageous impudence. You clearly understand. I don't want you
ever to mention my name unless I'm dead. If I feel that I've an
advocate in you--advocatus diaboli, if you like--I'll go away
happy. You've got your brief. You know my life at home. You know
my record."

"My dear fellow," said I, "I promise to do everything in my power
to carry out your wishes. But as to your record--are you quite
certain that I know it?"

You must realise that there was a curious tension in the
situation, at any rate as far as it affected myself. Here was a
man with whom, for reasons you know, I had studiously cultivated
the most formal social relations, claiming my active participation
in the secret motives of his heart. Since his first return from
the front a bluff friendliness had been the keynote of our
intercourse. Nothing more. Now he came and without warning
enmeshed me in this intimate net of love and death. I promised to
do his bidding--I could not do otherwise. I was in the position of
an executor according to the terms of a last will and testament.
Our comradeship in arms--those of our old Army who survive will
understand--forbade refusal. Besides, his intensity of purpose won
my sympathy and admiration. But I loved him none the more. To my
cripple's detested sensitiveness, as he stood over me, he loomed
more than ever the hulking brute. His semi-confessions and
innuendoes exacerbated my feelings of distrust and repulsion. And
yet, at the same tune, I could not--nor did I try to--repress an
immense pity for the man; perhaps less for the man than for the
soul in pain. At the back of his words some torment burned at red
heat, remorselessly. He sought relief. Perhaps he sought it from
me because I was as apart as a woman from his physical splendour,
a kind of bodiless creature with just a brain and a human heart,
the ghost of an old soldier, far away from the sphere of poor
passions and little jealousies.

I felt the tentacles of the man's nature blindly and convulsively
groping after something within me that eluded them. That is the
best way in which I can describe the psychology of these strange
moments. The morning sun streamed into my little oak-panelled
dining-room and caught the silver and fruit on the breakfast table
and made my frieze of old Delft glow blue like the responsive
western sky. With his back to the vivid window, Leonard Boyce
stood cut out black like a silhouette. That he, too, felt the
tension, I know; for a wasp crawled over his face, from cheek-
bone, across his temples, to his hair, and he did not notice it.

Instinctively I said the words: "Your record. Are you quite
certain that I know it?"

With what intensity, with what significance in my eyes, I may have
said them, I know not. I repeat that I had a subconsciousness,
almost uncanny, that we were souls rather than men, talking to
each other. He sat down once more, drawing the chair to the table
and resting his elbow on it.

"My record," said he. "What about it?"

Again please understand that I felt I had the man's soul naked
before me. An imponderable hand plucked away my garments of
convention.

"Some time ago," said I, "you spoke of my attitude towards you
being marked by a certain reserve. That is quite true. It dates
back many years. It dates back from the South African War. From an
affair at Vilboek's Farm."

Again his lips twitched; but otherwise he did not move.

"I remember," he answered. "My men saw me run away. I came out of
it quite clean."

I said: "I saw the man afterwards in hospital at Cape Town. His
name was Somers. He told me quite a different story."

His face grew grey. He glanced at me for a fraction of a second.
"What did he tell you?" he asked quietly.

In the fewest possible words I repeated what I have set down
already in this book. When I had ended, he said in the same
toneless way:

"You have believed that all these years?"

"I have done my best not to believe it. The last twelve months
have disproved it."

He shook his head. "They haven't. Nothing I can do in this world
can disprove it. What that man said was true."

"True?"

I drew a deep breath and stared at him hard. His eyes met mine.
They were very sad and behind them lay great pain. Although I
expressed astonishment, it proceeded rather from some reflex
action than from any realised shock to my consciousness. I say the
whole thing was uncanny. I knew, as soon as he sat down by the
table, that he would confess to the Vilboek story. And yet, at
last, when he did confess and there were no doubts lingering in my
mind, I gasped and stared at him.

"I was a bloody coward," he said. "That's frank enough. When they
rode away and left me, I tried to shoot myself--and I couldn't. If
the man Somers hadn't returned, I think I should have waited until
they sent to arrest me. But he did come back and the instinct of
self-preservation was too strong. I know my story about the men's
desertion and my forcing him to back me up was vile and
despicable. But I clung to life and it was my only chance.
Afterwards, with the horror of the thing hanging over me, I didn't
care so much about life. In the little fighting that was left for
me I deliberately tried to throw it away. I ask you to believe
that."

"I do," I said. "You were mentioned in dispatches for gallantry in
action."

He passed his hand over his eyes. Looking up, he said:

"It is strange that you of all men, my neighbour here, should have
heard of this. Not a whisper of its being known has ever reached
me. How many people do you think have any idea of it?"

I told him all that I knew and concluded by showing him Reggie
Dacre's letter, which I had kept in the letter-case in my pocket.
He returned it to me without a word. Presently he broke a spell of
silence. All this time he had sat fixed in the one attitude--only
shifted once, when Marigold entered to clear away the breakfast
things and was dismissed by me with a glance and a gesture.

"Do you remember," he said, "a talk we had about fear, in April,
the first time I was over? I described what I knew. The paralysis
of fear. Since we are talking as I never thought to talk with a
human being, I may as well make my confession. I'm a man of strong
animal passions. When I see red, I daresay I'm just a brute beast.
But I'm a physical coward. Owing to this paralysis of fear, this
ghastly inhibition of muscular or nervous action, I have gone
through things even worse than that South-African business. I go
about like a man under a curse. Even out there, when I don't care
a damn whether I live or die, the blasted thing gets hold of me."
He swung himself away from the table and shook his great clenched
firsts. "By the grace of God, no one yet has seemed to notice it.
I suppose I have a swift brain and as soon as the thing is over I
can cover it up. It's my awful terror that one day I shall be
found out and everything I've gained shall be stripped away from
me."

"But what about a thing like this?" said I, tapping Colonel
Dacre's letter.

"That's all right," he answered grimly. "That's when I know what
I'm facing. That's deliberate pot-hunting. It's saving face as the
Chinese say. It's doing any damned thing that will put me right
with myself."

He got up and swung about the room. I envied him, I would have
given a thousand pounds to do the same just for a few moments. But
I was stuck in my confounded chair, deprived of physical outlet.
Suddenly he came to a halt and stood once more over me.

"Now you know what kind of a fellow I am, what do you think of
me?"

It was a brutal question to fling at my head. It gave me no time
to co-ordinate my ideas. What was one to make of a man avowedly
subject to fits of the most despicable cowardice from the
consequences of which he used any unscrupulous craftiness to
extricate himself, and yet was notorious in his achievement of
deeds of the most reckless courage? It is a problem to which I
have devoted all the months occupied in waiting this book. How the
dickens could I solve it at a minute's notice? The situation was
too blatant, too raw, too near bedrock, too naked and unashamed,
for me to take refuge in platitudinous generalities of excuse. The
bravest of men know Fear. They know him pretty intimately. But
they manage to kick him to Hades by the very reason of their being
brave men. I had to take Leonard Boyce as I found him. And I must
admit that I found him a tragically miserable man. That is how I
answered his question--in so many words.

"You're not far wrong," said he.

He picked up cap and stick.

"When I get up to town I shall make my will. I've never worried
about it before. Can I appoint you my executor?"

"Certainly," said I.

"I'm very grateful. I'll assure you a fireworks sort of finish, so
that you shan't be ashamed. And--I don't ask impossibilities--I
can't hold you to your previous promise--but what about Betty
Connor?"

"You may count," said I, "on my acting like an officer and a
gentleman, and, if I may say so, like a Christian."

He said: "Thank you, Meredyth. Good-bye." Then he stuck on his
cap, brought his fingers to the peak in salute and marched to the
door.

"Boyce!" I cried sharply.

He turned. "Yes?"

"Aren't you going to shake hands with me?"

He retraced the few steps to my chair.

"I didn't know whether it would be--" he paused, seeking for a
word--"whether it would be agreeable."

Then I broke down. The strain had been too great for my sick man's
nerves. I forgot all about the brutality of his bull-neck, for he
faced me in all his gallant manhood and there was a damnable
expression in his eyes like that of a rated dog. I stretched out
my hand.

"My dear good fellow," I cried, "what the hell are you talking
about?"





CHAPTER XVI


Boyce left Wellingsford that afternoon, and for many months I
heard little about him. His astonishing avowal had once more
turned topsy-turvy my conception of his real nature. I had to
reconstruct the man, a very complicated task. I had to reconcile
in him all kinds of opposites--the lusty brute and the sentimental
lover; the physical coward and the baresark hero; the man with
hell in his soul and the debonair gentleman. After a vast deal of
pondering, I arrived not very much nearer a solution of the
problem. The fact remained, however, that I found myself in far
closer sympathy with him than ever before. After all that he had
said, I should have had a heart of stone if it had not been
stirred to profound pity. I had seen an instance both of his
spell-bound cowardice and of his almost degrading craft in
extrication. That in itself repelled me. But it lost its value in
the light that he had cast on the never-ceasing torment that
consumed him. At any rate he was at death-grips with himself,
strangling the devils of fear and dishonour with a hand
relentlessly certain. He appeared to me a tragic figure warring
against a doom.

At first I expected every day to receive an agonised message from
Mrs. Boyce announcing his death. Then, as is the way of humans,
the keenness of my apprehension grew blunted, until, at last, I
took his continued existence as a matter of course. I wrote him a
few friendly letters, to which he replied in the same strain. And
so the months went on.

Looking over my diary I find that these months were singularly
uneventful as far as the lives of those dealt with in this
chronicle were concerned. In the depths of our souls we felt the
long-drawn-out agony of the war, with its bitter humiliations, its
heartrending disappointments. In our daily meetings one with
another we cried aloud for a great voice to awaken the little folk
in Great Britain from their selfish lethargy--the little folk in
high office, in smug burgessdom, in seditious factory and
shipyard. They were months of sordid bargaining between all
sections of our national life, in the murk of which the glow of
patriotism seemed to be eclipsed. And in the meantime, the heroic
millions from all corners of our far-flung Empire were giving
their lives on land and sea, gaily and gallantly, too often in
tragic futility, for the ideals to which the damnable little folk
at home were blind. The little traitorous folk who gambled for
their own hands in politics, the little traitorous folk who put
the outworn shibboleths of a party before the war-cry of an
Empire, the little traitorous folk who strove with all their power
to starve our navy of ships, our ships of coal, our men in the
trenches of munitions, our armies of men, our country of honour--
all these will one day be mercilessly arraigned at the bar of
history. The plains of France, the steeps of Gallipoli, the swamps
of Mesopotamia, the Seven Seas will give up their dead as
witnesses.

We spoke bitterly of all these things and thought of them with
raging impotence; but the even tenor of our life went on. We
continued to do our obscure and undistinguished work for the
country. It became a habit, part of the day's routine. We almost
forgot why we were doing it. The war seemed to make little real
difference in our social life. The small town was pitch black at
night. Prices rose. Small economies were practised. Labour was
scarce. Fewer young men out of uniform were seen in the streets
and neighbouring roads and lanes. Groups of wounded from the
hospital in their uniform of deep blue jean with red ties and
khaki caps gave a note of actuality to the streets. Otherwise,
there were few signs of war. Even the troops who hitherto swarmed
about the town had gradually been removed from billets to a vast
camp of huts some miles away, and appeared only sporadically about
the place. I missed them and the stimulus of their presence. They
brought me into closer touch with things. Marigold, too, pined for
more occupation for his one critical eye than was afforded by the
local volunteers. He grew morose, sick of a surfeit of newspapers.
If he could have gone to France and got through to the firing-
line, I am sure he would have dug a little trench all to himself
and defied the Germans on his own account.

In November Colonel Dacre was brought home gravely wounded, to a
hospital for officers in London. A nurse gave me the news in a
letter in which she said that he had asked to see me before an
impending hazardous operation. I went up to town and found him
wrecked almost beyond recognition. As we were the merest of
acquaintances with nothing between us save our common link with
Boyce, I feared lest he should desire to tell me of some shameful
discovery. But his gay greeting and the brave smile, pathetically
grotesque through the bandages in which his head was wrapped,
reassured me. Only his eyes and mouth were visible.

"It's worth while being done in," said he. "It makes one feel like
a Sultan. You have just to clap your hands and say 'I want this,'
and you've got it. I've a good mind to say to this dear lady,
'Fetch their gracious Majesties from Buckingham Palace,' and I'm
sure they'd be here in a tick. It's awfully good of you to come,
Meredyth."

I signed to Marigold, who had carried me into the ward and set me
down on a chair, and to the Sister, the "dear lady" of Dacre's
reference, to withdraw, and after a few sympathetic words I asked
him why he had sent for me.

"I'm broken to bits all over," he replied. "The doctors here say
they never saw such a blooming mess-up of flesh pretending to be
alive. And as for talking, they'd just as soon expect speech from
a jellyfish squashed by a steam-roller. If I do get through, I'll
be a helpless crock all my days. I funked it till I thought of
you. I thought the sight of another fellow who has gone through it
and stuck it out might give me courage. I've had my wife here.
We're rather fond of one another, you know ... My God! what brave
things women are! If she had broken down all over me I could have
risen to the occasion. But she didn't, and I felt a cowardly
worm."

"I had a brave wife, too," said I, and for a few moments we talked
shyly about the women who had played sacred parts in our lives.
Whether he was comforted by what I said I don't know. Probably he
only listened politely. But I think he found comfort in a
sympathetic ear.

Presently he turned on to Boyce, the real motive of his summons.
He repented much that he had told and written to me. His long
defamation of the character of a brother-officer had lain on his
conscience. And lately he had, at last, met Boyce personally, and
his generous heart had gone out to the man's soldierly charm.

"I never felt such a slanderous brute in my life as when I shook
him by the hand. You know the feeling--how one wants to get behind
a hedge and kick oneself. Kick oneself," he repeated faintly. Then
he closed his eyes and his lips contracted in pain.

The Sister, who had been watching him from a distance, came up. He
had talked enough. It was time to go. But at the announcement he
opened his eyes again and with an effort recovered his gaiety.

"The whole gist of the matter lies in the postscript. Like a
woman's letter. I must have my postscript."

"Very well. Two more minutes."

"Merciless dragon," said he.

She smiled and left us.

"The dearest angel, bar one, in the world." said he. "What were we
talking about?"

"Colonel Boyce."

"Oh, yes. Forgive me. My head goes FUT now and then. It's idiotic
not to be able to control one's brain.... The point is this. I may
peg out. I know this operation they're going to perform is just
touch and go. I want to face things with a clear conscience. I've
convinced you, haven't I, that there wasn't a word of truth in
that South-African story? If ever it crops up you'll scotch it
like a venomous snake?"

The ethics of my answer I leave to the casuist. I am an old-
fashioned Church of England person. As I am so mentally
constituted that I am unable to believe cheerfully in nothing. I
believe in God and Jesus Christ, and accept the details of
doctrine as laid down in the Thirty-nine Articles. For liars I
have the Apocryphal condemnation. Yet I lied without the faintest
rippling qualm of conscience.

"My dear fellow," said I, stoutly, "there's not the remotest speck
of truth in it. You haven't a second's occasion to worry."

"That's all right," he said.

The Sister approached again. Instinctively I stretched out my
hand. He laughed.

"No good. You must take it as gripped. Goodbye, old chap."

I bade him good-bye and Marigold wheeled me away.

A few days afterwards they told me that this gay, gallant,
honourable, sensitive gentleman was dead. Although I had known him
so little, it seemed that I knew him very intimately, and I deeply
mourned his loss.

I think this episode was the most striking of what I may term
personal events during those autumn months.

Of Randall Holmes we continued to hear in the same mysterious
manner. His mother visited the firm of solicitors in London
through whom his correspondence passed. They pleaded ignorance of
his doings and professional secrecy as to the disclosure of his
whereabouts. In December he ceased writing altogether, and twice a
week Mrs. Holmes received a formal communication from the lawyers
to the effect that they had been instructed by her son to inform
her that he was in perfect health and sent her his affectionate
greetings. Such news of this kind as I received I gave to Betty,
who passed it on to Phyllis Gedge.

Of course my intimacy with my dear Betty continued unbroken. If
the unmarried Betty had a fault, it was a certain sweet
truculence, a pretty self-assertiveness which sometimes betrayed
intolerance of human foibles. Her widowhood had, in a subtle way,
softened these little angularities of her spiritual contour. And
bodily, the curves of her slim figure had become more rounded. She
was no longer the young Diana of a year ago. The change into the
gracious woman who had passed through the joy and the sorrow of
life was obvious even to me, to whom it had been all but
imperceptibly gradual. After a while she rarely spoke of her
husband. The name of Leonard Boyce was never mentioned between us.
With her as with me, the weeks ate up the uneventful days and the
months the uneventful weeks. In her humdrum life the falling away
of Mrs. Tufton loomed catastrophic.

For four months Mrs. Tufton shone splendid as the wife of the
British warrior. The Wellingsford Hospital rang with her praises
and glistened with her scrubbing brush. She was the Admirable
Crichton of the institution. What with men going off to the war
and women going off to make munitions, there were never-ending
temporary gaps in the staff. And there was never a gap that Mrs.
Tufton did not triumphantly fill. The pride of Betty, who had
wrought this reformation, was simply monstrous. If she had created
a real live angel, wings and all, out of the dust-bin, she could
not have boasted more arrogantly. Being a member of the Hospital
Committee, I must confess to a bemused share in the popular
enthusiasm. And was I not one of the original discoverers of Mrs.
Tufton? When Marigold, inspired doubtless by his wife, from time
to time suggested disparagement of the incomparable woman, I
rebuked him for an arrant scandal-monger. There had been a case or
two of drunkenness at the hospital. Wounded soldiers had returned
the worse for liquor, an almost unforgivable offence.... Not that
the poor fellows desired to get drunk. A couple of pints of ale or
a couple of glasses of whisky will set swimming the head of any
man who has not tasted alcohol for months. But to a man with a
septic wound or trench nephritis or smashed up skull, alcohol is
poison and poison is death, and so it is sternly forbidden to our
wounded soldiers. They cannot be served in public houses. Where,
then, did the hospital defaulters get their drink?

"If I was you, sir," said Marigold, "I'd keep an eye on that there
Mrs. Tufton."

I instantly annihilated him--or should have done so had his
expressionless face not been made of non-inflammable timber. He
said: "Very good, sir." But there was a damnably ironical and
insubordinate look in his one eye.

Gradually the lady lapsed from grace. She got up late and
complained of spasms. She left dustpan and brush on a patient's
bed. She wrongfully interfered with the cook, insisting, until she
was forcibly ejected from the kitchen, on throwing lettuces into
the Irish stew. Finally, one Sunday afternoon, a policeman
wandering through some waste ground, a deserted brickfield behind
Flowery End, came upon an unedifying spectacle. There were madam
and an elderly Irish soldier sprawling blissfully comatose with an
empty flask of gin and an empty bottle of whisky lying between
them. They were taken to the hospital and put to bed. The next
morning, the lady, being sober, was skummarily dismissed by the
matron. Late at night she rang and battered at the door,
clamouring for admittance, which was refused. Then she went away,
apparently composed herself to slumber in the roadway of the
pitch-black High Street, and was killed by a motor-car. And that,
bar the funeral, was the end of Mrs. Tufton.

From her bereaved husband, with whom I at once communicated, I
received the following reply:

"Dear Sir,

"Yours to hand announcing the accidental death of my wife, which I
need not say I deeply regret. You will be interested to hear that
I have been offered a commission in the Royal Fusiliers, which I
am now able to accept. In view of the same, any expense to which
you may be put to give my late wife honourable burial, I shall be
most ready to defray.

"With many thanks for your kindness in informing me of this
unfortunate circumstance,

"I am,

"Yours faithfully,

"JOHN P. TUFTON."

"I think he's a horrid, callous, cold-blooded fellow!" cried Betty
when I showed her this epistle.

"After all," said I, "she wasn't a model wife. If the fatal motor-
car hadn't come along, the probability is that she would have
received poor Tufton on his next leave with something even more
deadly than a poker. Now and again the Fates have brilliant
inspirations. This was one of them. Now, you see the virago-
clogged Tufton is a free man, able to accept a commission and
start a new life as an officer and a gentleman."

"I think you're perfectly odious. Odious and cynical," she
exclaimed wrathfully.

"I think," said I, "that a living warrior is better than a dead--
Disappointment."

"You don't understand," she stormed. "If I didn't love you, I
could rend you to pieces."

"It is because I do understand, my dear," said I, enjoying the
flashing beauty of her return to Artemisian attitudes, "that I
particularly characterised the dear lady as a disappointment."

"I think," she said, in dejected generalisation, "the working out
of the whole scheme of the universe is a disappointment."

"The High Originators of the scheme seem to bear it pretty
philosophically," I rejoined; "so why shouldn't we?"

"They're gods and we're human," said Betty.

"Precisely," said I. "And oughtn't it to be our ideal to
approximate to the divine attitude?"

Again Betty declared that I was odious. From her point of view--
No. That is an abuse of language. There are mental states in which
a woman has no point of view at all. She wanders over an ill-
defined circular area of vision. That is why, in such conditions,
you can never pin a woman down with a shaft of logic and compel
her surrender, as you can compel that of a mere man. We went on
arguing, and after a time I really did not know what I was arguing
about. I advanced and tried to support the theory that on the
whole the progress of humanity as represented by the British
Empire in general and the about-to-be Lieutenant Tufton in
particular, was advanced by the opportune demise of an
unfortunately balanced lady. From her point--or rather her
circular area of vision--perhaps my dear Betty was right in
declaring me odious. She hated to be reminded of the intolerable
goosiness of her swan. She longed for comforting, corroborative
evidence of essential swaniness for her own justification. In a
word, the poor dear girl was sore all over with mortification, and
wherever one touched her, no matter with how gentle a finger, one
hurt.

"I would have trusted that woman," she cried tragically, "with a
gold-mine or a distillery."

"We trusted her with something more valuable, my dear," said I.
"Our guileless faith in human nature. Anyhow we'll keep the faith
undamaged."

She smiled. "That's considerably less odious."

Nothing more could be said. We let the unfortunate subject rest in
peace for ever after.

These two episodes, the death of poor Reggie Dacre and the Tufton
catastrophe, are the only incidents in my diary that are worth
recording here. Christmas came and went and we entered on the new
year of 1916. It was only at a date in the middle of February, a
year since I had driven to Wellings Park to hear the tragic news
of Oswald Fenimore's death, that I find an important entry in my
diary.





CHAPTER XVII


Mrs. Boyce was shown into my study, her comely Dresden china face
very white and her hands shaking. She held a telegram. I had seen
faces like that before. Every day in England there are hundreds
thus stricken. I feared the worst. It was a relief to read the
telegram and find that Boyce was only wounded. The message said
seriously wounded, but gave consolation by adding that his life
was not in immediate danger. Mrs. Boyce was for setting out for
France forthwith. I dissuaded her from a project so embarrassing
to the hospital authorities and so fatiguing to herself. In spite
of the chivalry and humanity of our medical staff, old ladies of
seventy are not welcome at a busy base hospital. As soon as he was
fit to be moved, I assured her, he would be sent home, before she
could even obtain her permits and passes and passport and make
other general arrangements for her journey. There was nothing for
it but her Englishwoman's courage. She held up her hand at that,
and went away to live, like many another, patiently through the
long hours of suspense.

For two or three days no news came. I spent as much time as I
could with my old friend, seeking to comfort her.

On the third morning it was announced in the papers that the King
had been graciously pleased to confer the Victoria Cross on Lt.
Colonel Leonard Boyce for conspicuous gallantry in action. It did
not occur in a list of honours. It had a special paragraph all to
itself. Such isolated announcements generally indicate immediate
recognition of some splendid feat. I was thrilled by the news. It
was a grand achievement to win through death to the greatest of
all military rewards deliberately coveted. Here, as I had strange
reason for knowing, was no sudden act of sublime valour. The final
achievement was the result of months of heroic, almost suicidal
daring. And it was repayment of a terrible debt, the whole extent
of which I knew not, owed by the man to his tormented soul.

I rang up Mrs. Boyce, who replied tremulously to my
congratulations. Would I come over and lunch?

I found a very proud and tearful old lady. She may not have known
the difference between a platoon and a howitzer, and have
conceived the woolliest notions of the nature of her son's
command, but the Victoria Cross was a matter on which her ideas
were both definite and correct. She had spent the morning at the
telephone receiving calls of congratulation. A great sheaf of
telegrams had arrived. Two or three of them were from the High and
Mighty of the Military Hierarchy. She was in such a twitter of joy
that she almost forgot her anxiety as to his wounds.

"Do you think he knows? I telegraphed to him at once."

"So did I."

She glanced at the ormolu clock on the mantelpiece.

"How long would it take for a telegram to reach him?"

"You may be sure he has it by now," said I, "and it has given him
a prodigious appetite for lunch."

Her face clouded over. "That horrid tinned stuff. It's so
dangerous. I remember once Mary's aunt--or was it Cook's aunt--
one of them any way--nearly died of eating tinned lobster--
ptomaine poisoning. I've always told Leonard not to touch it.

"They don't give Colonels and V.C.s tinned lobster at Boulogne," I
answered cheerfully. "He's living now on the fat of the land."

"Let us hope so," she sighed dubiously. "It's no use my sending
out things for him, as they always go wrong. Some time ago I sent
him three brace of grouse and three brace of partridges. He didn't
acknowledge them for weeks, and then he said they were most handy
things to kill Germans with, but were an expensive form of
ammunition. I don't quite know what he meant--but at any rate they
were not eatable when they arrived. Poor fellow!" She sighed
again. "If only I knew what was the matter with him."

"It can't be much," I reassured her, "or you would have heard
again. And this news will act like a sovereign remedy."

She patted the back of my hand with her plump palm. "You're always
so sympathetic and comforting."

"I'm an old soldier, like Leonard," said I, "and never meet
trouble halfway."

At lunch, the old lady insisted on opening a bottle of champagne,
a Veuve Clicquot which Leonard loved, in honour of the glorious
occasion. We could not drink to the hero's health in any meaner
vintage, although she swore that a teaspoonful meant death to her,
and I protested that a confession of champagne to my medical
adviser meant a dog's rating. We each, conscience-bound, put up
the tips of our fingers to the glasses as soon as Mary had filled
them with froth, and solemnly drank the toast in the eighth of an
inch residuum. But by some freakish chance or the other, there was
nothing left in that quart bottle by the time Mary cleared the
table for dessert. And to tell the honest truth, I don't think the
health of either my hostess or myself was a penny the worse. Let
no man despise generous wine. Treated with due reverence it is a
great loosener of human sympathy.

Generous ale similarly treated produces the same effect. Marigold,
driving me home, cocked a luminous eye on me and said:

"Begging your pardon, sir, would you mind very much if I broke the
neck of that there Gedge?"

"You would be aiding the good cause," said I, "but I should
deplore the hanging of an old friend. What has Gedge been doing?"

Marigold sounded his horn and slowed down round a bend, and, as
soon as he got into a straight road, he replied.

"I m not going to say, sir, if I may take the liberty, that I was
ever sweet on Colonel Boyce. People affect you in different ways.
You either like 'em or you don't like 'em. You can't tell why. And
a Sergeant, being, as you may say, a human being, has as much
right to his private feelings regarding a Colonel as any officer."

"Undoubtedly," said I.

"Well, sir, I never thought Colonel Boyce was true metal. But I
take it all back--every bit of it."

"For God's sake," I cried, stretching out a foolish but
instinctive hand to the wheel, "for God's sake, control your
emotions, or you'll be landing us in the ditch."

"That's all right, sir," he replied, steering a straight course.
"She's a bit skittish at times. I was saying as how I did the
Colonel an injustice. I'm very sorry. No man who wasn't steel all
through ever got the V.C. They don't chuck it around on
blighters."

"That's all very interesting and commendable," said I, "but what
has it to do with Gedge?"

"He has been slandering the Colonel something dreadful the last
few months, sneering at him, saying nothing definite, but
insinuatingly taking away his character."

"In what way?" I asked.

"Well, he tells one man that the Colonel's a drunkard, another
that it's women, another that he gambles and doesn't pay, another
that he pays the newspapers to put in all these things about him,
while all the time in France he's in a blue funk hiding in his
dugout."

"That's moonshine," said I. And as regards the drinking, drabbing,
and gaming of course it was. But the suggestion of cowardice gave
me a sharp stab of surprise and dismay.

"I know it is," said Marigold. "But the people hereabouts are so
ignorant, you can make them believe anything." Marigold was a man
of Kent and had a poor opinion of those born and bred in other
counties. "I met Gedge this morning," he continued, and thereupon
gave me the substance of the conversation. I hardly think the
adjectives of the report were those that were really used.

"So your precious Colonel has got the V.C.," sneered Gedge.

"He has," said Marigold. "And it's too great an honour for your
inconsiderable town."

"If this inconsiderable town knew as much about him as I do, it
would give him the order of the precious boot."

"And what do you know?" asked Marigold.

"That's what all you downtrodden slaves of militarism would like
to find out," replied Gedge. "The time will come when I, and such
as I, will tear the veils away and expose them, and say 'These be
thy gods, O Israel.'"

"The time will come," retorted Marigold, "when if you don't hold
your precious jaw, I and such as I will smash it into a thousand
pieces. For twopence I'd knock your ugly head off this present
minute."

Whereupon Gedge apparently wilted before the indignant eye of
Sergeant Marigold and faded away down the High Street.

All this in itself seemed very trivial, but for the past year the
attitude of Gedge had been mysterious. Could it be possible that
Gedge thought himself the sole repository of the secret which
Boyce had so desperately confided to me? But when had the life of
Gedge and the military life of Leonard Boyce crossed? It was
puzzling.

Well, to tell the truth, I thought no more about the matter. The
glow of Mrs. Boyce's happiness remained with me all the evening.
Rarely had I seen her so animated, so forgetful of her own
ailments. She had taken the rosiest view of Leonard's physical
condition and sunned herself in the honour conferred on him by the
King. I had never spent a pleasanter afternoon at her house. We
had comfortably criticised our neighbours, and, laudatores
temporis acti, had extolled the days of our youth. I went to bed
as well pleased with life as a man can be in this convulsion of
the world.

The next morning she sent me a letter to read. It was written at
Boyce's dictation. It ran:

"Dear Mother:

"I'm sorry to say I am knocked out pro tem. I was fooling about
where a C.O. didn't ought to, and a Bosch bullet got me so that I
can't write. But don't worry at all about me. I'm too tough for
anything the Bosches can do. To show how little serious it is,
they tell me that I'll be conveyed to England in a day or two. So
get hot-water bottles and bath salts ready.

"Your ever loving Leonard."

This was good news. Over the telephone wire we agreed that the
letter was a justification of our yesterday's little merrymaking.
Obviously, I told her, he would live to fight another day. She was
of opinion that he had done enough fighting already. If he went on
much longer, the poor boy would get quite tired out, to say
nothing of the danger of being wounded again. The King ought to
let him rest on his laurels and make others who hadn't worked a
quarter as hard do the remainder of the war.

"Perhaps," I said light-heartedly, "Leonard will drop the hint
when he writes to thank the King for the nice cross."

She said that I was laughing at her, and rang off in the best of
spirits.

In the evening came Betty, inviting herself to dinner. She had
been on night duty at the hospital, and I had not seen her for
some days. The sight of her, bright-eyed and brave, fresh and
young, always filled me with happiness. I felt her presence like
wine and the sea wind and the sunshine. So greatly did her
vitality enrich me, that sometimes I called myself a horrid old
vampire.

As soon as she had greeted me, she said in her downright way:

"So Leonard Boyce has got his V.C."

"Yes," said I. "What do you think of it?"

A spot of colour rose to her cheek. "I'm very glad. It's no use,
Majy, pretending that I ignore his existence. I don't and I can't.
Because I loved and married someone else doesn't alter the fact
that I once cared for him, does it?"

"Many people," said I, judicially, "find out that they have been
mistaken as to the extent and nature of their own sentiments."

"I wasn't mistaken," she replied, sitting down on the piano stool,
her hands on the leathern seat, her neatly shod feet stretched out
in front of her, just as she had sat on her wedding eve talking
nonsense to Willie Connor. "I wasn't mistaken. I was never
addicted to silly school-girl fancies. I know my own mind. I cared
a lot for Leonard Boyce."

"Eh bien?" said I.

"Well, don't you see what I'm driving at?"

"I don't a bit."

She sighed. "Oh, dear! How dull some people are! Don't you see
that, when an affair like that is over, a woman likes to get some
evidence of the man's fine qualities, in order to justify her for
having once cared for him?"

"Quite so. Yet--" I felt argumentative. The breach, as you know,
between Betty and Boyce was wrapped in exasperating obscurity.
"Yet, on the other hand," said I, "she might welcome evidence of
his worthlessness, so as to justify her for having thrown him
over."

"If a woman isn't a dam-fool already," said Betty, "and I don't
think I'm one, she doesn't like to feel that she ever made a dam-
fool of herself. She is proud of her instincts and her judgments
and the sensitive, emotional intelligence that is hers. When all
these seem to have gone wrong, it's pleasing to realise that
originally they went right. It soothes one's self-respect, one's
pride. I know now that all these blind perceptions in me went
straight to certain magnificent essentials--those that make the
great, strong, fearless fighting man. That's attractive to a
woman, you know. At any rate, to an independent barbarian like
myself--"

"My dear Betty," I interrupted with a laugh. "You a barbarian? You
whom I regard as the last word, the last charming and delightful
word, in modern womanhood?"

"Of course I'm the child of my century," she cried, flushing. "I
want votes, freedom, opportunity for expansion, power--everything
that can develop Betty Connor into a human product worthy of the
God who made her. But how she could fulfil herself without the
collaboration of a man, has baffled her ever since she was a girl
of sixteen, when she began to awake to the modern movement. On one
side I saw women perfectly happy in the mere savage state of
wifehood and motherhood, and not caring a hang for anything else,
and on the other side women who threw babies back into limbo and
preached of nothing but intellectual and political and economic
independence. Oh, I worried terribly about it, Majy, when I was a
girl. Each side seemed to have such a lot to say for itself. Then
it dawned upon me that the only way out of the dilemma was to
combine both ideals--that of the savage woman in skins and the
lady professor in spectacles. That is what, allowing for the
difference of sex, a man does. Why shouldn't a woman? The woman,
of course, has to droop a bit more to the savage, because she has
to produce the babies and suckle them, and so forth, and a man
hasn't. That was my philosophy of life when I entered the world as
a young woman. Love came into it, of course. It was a
sanctification of the savagery. I've gone on like this," she
laughed, "because I don't want you to protest in your dear old-
fashioned way against my calling myself an independent barbarian.
I am, and I glory in it. That's why, as I was saying, I'm deeply
glad that Leonard Boyce has made good. His honour means a good
deal to me--to my self-esteem. I hope," she added, rising and
coming to me with a caressing touch. "I hope you've got the hang
of the thing now."

Within myself I sincerely hoped I had. If her sentiments were just
as she analysed them, all was well. If, on the other hand, the
little demon of love for Boyce still lurked in her heart, in spite
of the marriage and widowhood, there might be trouble ahead. I
remembered how once she had called him a devil. I remembered, too,
uncomfortably, the scrap of conversation I had overheard between
Boyce and herself in the hall. She had lashed him with her scorn,
and he had taken his whipping without much show of fight. Still, a
woman's love, especially that of a lady barbarian, was a curiously
complex affair, and had been known to impel her to trample on a
man one minute and the next to fall at his feet. Now the worm she
had trampled on had turned; stood erect as a properly
authenticated hero. I felt dubious as to the ensuing situation.

"I wrote to old Mrs. Boyce," she added after a while. "I thought
it only decent. I wrote yesterday, but only posted the letter to-
day, so as to be sure I wasn't acting on impulse."

The latter part of the remark was by way of apology. The breach of
the engagement had occasioned a cessation of social relations
between Betty and Mrs. Boyce. Betty's aunts had ceased calling on
Mrs. Boyce and Mrs. Boyce had ceased calling on Betty's aunts.
Whenever the estranged parties met, which now and then was
inevitable in a little town, they bowed with distant politeness,
but exchanged no words. Everything was conducted with complete
propriety. The old lady, knowing how beloved an intimate of mine
was Betty, alluded but once to the broken engagement. That was
when Betty got married.

"It has been a great unhappiness to me, Major," she said. "In
spite of her daring ways, which an old woman like myself can't
quite understand, I was very fond of her. She was just the girl
for Leonard. They made such a handsome couple. I have never known
why it was broken off. Leonard won't tell me. It's out of the
question that it could be his fault, and I can't believe it is all
Betty Fairfax's. She's a girl of too much character to be a mere
jilt."

I remember that I couldn't help smiling at the application of the
old-fashioned word to my Betty.

"You may be quite certain she isn't that," said I.

"Then what was the reason? Do you know?"

I didn't. I was as mystified as herself. I told her so. I didn't
mention that a few days before she had implied that Leonard was a
devil and she wished that he was dead, thereby proving to me, who
knew Betty's uprightness, that Boyce and Boyce only was to blame
in the matter. It would have been a breach of confidence, and it
would not have made my old friend any the happier. It would have
fired her with flaming indignation against Betty.

"Young people," said I, "must arrange their own lives." And we
left it at that. Now and then, afterwards, she enquired politely
after Betty's health, and when Willie Connor was killed, she spoke
to me very feelingly and begged me to convey to Betty the
expression of her deep sympathy. In the unhappy circumstances, she
explained, she was naturally precluded from writing.

So Betty's letter was the first direct communication that had
passed between them for nearly two years. That is why to my
meddlesome-minded self it appeared to have some significance.

"You did, did you?" said I. Then I looked at her quickly, with an
idea in my head. "What did Mrs. Boyce say in reply?"

"She has had no time to answer. Didn't I tell you I only posted
the letter to-day?"

"Then you've heard nothing more about Leonard Boyce except that he
has got the V.C.?"

"No. What more is there to hear?"

Even Bettys are sly folk. It behooved me to counter with equal
slyness. I wondered whether she had known all along of Boyce's
mishap, or had been informed of it by his mother. Knowledge might
explain her unwonted outburst. I looked at her fixedly.

"What's the matter?" she asked, bending slightly down to me.

"You haven't heard that he is wounded?"

She straightened herself. "No. When?"

"Five days ago."

"Why didn't you tell me?"

"I haven't seen you."

"I mean--this evening."

I reached for her hand. "Will you forgive me, my dear Betty, for
remarking that for the last twenty minutes you have done all the
talking?"

"Is he badly hurt?"

She ignored my playful rejoinder. I noted the fact. Usually she
was quick to play Beatrice to my Benedick. Had I caught her off
her guard?

I told her all that I knew. She seated herself again on the piano-
stool.

"I hope Mrs. Boyce did not think me unfeeling for not referring to
it," she said calmly. "You will explain, won't you?"

Marigold entered, announcing dinner. We went into the dining-room.
All through the meal Bella, my parlour-maid, flitted about with
dishes and plates, and Marigold, when he was not solemnly pouring
claret, stood grim behind my chair, roasting, as usual, his
posterior before a blazing fire, with soldierly devotion to duty.
Conversation fell a little flat. The arrival of the evening
newspapers, half an hour belated, created a diversion. The war is
sometimes subversive of nice table decorum. I read out the cream
of the news. Discussion thereon lasted us until coffee and
cigarettes were brought in and the servants left us to ourselves.

One of the curious little phenomena of human intercourse is the
fact that now and again the outer personality of one with whom you
are daily familiar suddenly strikes you afresh, thus printing, as
it were, a new portrait on your mind. At varying intervals I had
received such portrait impressions of Betty, and I had stored them
in my memory. Another I received at this moment, and it is among
the most delectable. She was sitting with both elbows on the
table, her palms clasped and her cheek resting on the back of the
left hand. Her face was turned towards me. She wore a low-cut
black chiffon evening dress--the thing had mere straps over the
shoulders--an all but discarded vanity of pre-war days. I had
never before noticed what beautiful arms she had. Perhaps in her
girlhood, when I had often seen her in such exiguous finery, they
had not been so shapely. I have told you already of the softening
touch of her womanhood. An exquisite curve from arm to neck faded
into the shadow of her hair. She had a single string of pearls
round her neck. The fatigue of last week's night duty had cast an
added spirituality over her frank, sensitive face.

We had not spoken for a while. She smiled at me.

"What are you thinking of?"

"I wasn't thinking at all," said I. "I was only gratefully
admiring you."

"Why gratefully?"

"Oughtn't one to be grateful to God for the beautiful things He
gives us?"

She flushed and averted her eyes. "You are very good to me, Majy."

"What made you attire yourself in all this splendour?" I asked,
laughing. The wise man does not carry sentiment too far. He keeps
it like a little precious nugget of pure gold; the less wise beats
it out into a flabby film.

"I don't know," she said, shifting her position and casting a
critical glance at her bodice. "All kinds of funny little feminine
vanities. Perhaps I wanted to see whether I hadn't gone off.
Perhaps I wanted to try to feel good-looking even if I wasn't.
Perhaps I thought my dear old Majy was sick to death of the
hospital uniform perfumed with disinfectant. Perhaps it was just a
catlike longing for comfort. Anyhow, I'm glad you like me."

"My dear Betty," said I, "I adore you."

"And I you," she laughed. "So there's a pair of us."

She lit a cigarette and sipped her coffee. Then, breaking a short
silence:

"I hope you quite understand, dear, what I said about Leonard
Boyce. I shouldn't like to leave you with the smallest little bit
of a wrong impression."

"What wrong impression could I possibly have?" I asked
disingenuously.

"You might think that I was still in love with him."

"That would be absurd," said I.

"Utterly absurd. I should feel it to be almost an insult if you
thought anything of the kind. Long before my marriage things that
had happened had killed all such feelings outright." She paused
for a few seconds and her brow darkened, just as it had done when
she had spoken of him in the days immediately preceding her
marriage with Willie Connor. Presently it cleared. "The whole
beginning and end of my present feelings," she continued, "is that
I'm glad the man I once cared for has won such high distinction,
and I'm sorry that such a brave soldier should be wounded."

I could do nothing else than assure her of my perfect
understanding. I upbraided myself as a monster of indelicacy for
my touch of doubt before dinner; also for a devilish and malicious
suspicion that flitted through my brain while she was cataloguing
her possible reasons for putting on the old evening dress. The
thought of Betty's beautiful arm and the man's bull-neck was a
shivering offence. I craved purification.

"If you've finished your coffee," I said, "let us go into the
drawing-room and have some music."

She rose with the impulsiveness of a child told that it can be
excused, and responded startlingly to my thought.

"I think we need it," she said.

In the drawing-room I swung my chair so that I could watch her
hands on the keys. She was a good musician and had the well-taught
executant's certainty and grace of movement. It may be the fancy
of an outer Philistine, but I love to forget the existence of the
instrument and to feel the music coming from the human finger-
tips. She found a volume of Chopin's Nocturnes on the rest. In
fact she had left it there a fortnight before, the last time she
had played for me. I am very fond of Chopin. I am an uneducated
fellow and the lyrical mostly appeals to me both in poetry and in
music. Besides, I have understood him better since I have been a
crock. And I loved Betty's sympathetic interpretation. So I sat
there, listening and watching, and I knew that she was playing for
the ease of both our souls. Once more I thanked God for the great
gift of Betty to my crippled life. Peace gathered round my heart
as Betty played.

The raucous buzz of the telephone in the corner of the room
knocked the music to shatters. I cried out impatiently. It was the
fault of that giant of ineptitude Marigold and his incompetent
satellites, whose duty it was to keep all upstairs extensions
turned off and receive calls below. Only two months before I had
been the victim of their culpable neglect, when I was forced to
have an altercation with a man at Harrod's Stores, who seemed
pained because I declined to take an interest in some idiotic
remark he was making about fish.

"I'll strangle Marigold with my own hands," I cried.

Betty, unmoved by my ferocity, laughed and rose from the piano.

"Shall I take the call?"

To Betty I was all urbanity. "If you'll be so kind, dear," said I.

She crossed the room and stopped the abominable buzzing.

"Yes. Hold on for a minute. It's the post-office"--she turned to
me--"telephoning a telegram that has just come in. Shall I take it
down for you?"

More urbanity on my part. She found pencil and paper on an
escritoire near by, and went back to the instrument. For a while
she listened and wrote. At last she said:

"Are you sure there's no signature?"

She got the reply, waited until the message had been read over,
and hung up the receiver. When she came round to me--my back had
been half turned to her all the time--I was astonished to see her
looking rather shaken. She handed me the paper without a word.

The message ran:

"Thanks yesterday's telegram. Just got home. Queen Victoria
Hospital, Belton Square. Must have talk with you before I
communicate with my mother. Rely absolutely on your discretion.
Come to-morrow. Forgive inconvenience caused, but most urgent."

"It's from Boyce," I said, looking up at her.

"Naturally."

"I suppose he omitted the signature to avoid any possible leakage
through the post-office here."

She nodded. "What do you think is the matter?"

"God knows," said I. "Evidently something very serious."

She went back to the piano seat. "It's odd that I should have
taken down that message," she said, after a while.

"I'll sack Marigold for putting you in that abominable position,"
I exclaimed wrathfully.

"No, you won't, dear. What does it signify? I'm not a silly child.
I suppose you're going to-morrow?"

"Of course--for Mrs. Boyce's sake alone I should have no
alternative."

She turned round and began to take up the thread of the Nocturne
from the point where she had left off; but she only played half a
page and quitted the piano abruptly.

"The pretty little spell is broken, Majy. No matter how we try to
escape from the war, it is always shrieking in upon us. We're up
against naked facts all the time. If we can't face them we go
under either physically or spiritually. Anyhow--" she smiled with
just a little touch of weariness,--"we may as well face them in
comfort."

She pushed my chair gently nearer to the fire and sat down by my
side. And there we remained in intimate silence until Marigold
announced the arrival of her car.





CHAPTER XVIII


I shrink morbidly from visiting strange houses. I shrink from the
unknown discomforts and trivial humiliations they may hold for me.
I hate, for instance, not to know what kind of a chair may be
provided for me to sit on. I hate to be carried up many stairs
even by my steel-crane of a Marigold. Just try doing without your
legs for a couple of days, and you will see what I mean. Of course
I despise myself for such nervous apprehensions, and do not allow
them to influence my actions--just as one, under heavy fire, does
not satisfy one's simple yearning to run away. I would have given
a year's income to be able to refuse Boyce's request with a clear
conscience; but I could not. I shrank all the more because my
visit in the autumn to Reggie Dacre had shaken me more than I
cared to confess. It had been the only occasion for years when I
had entered a London building other than my club. To the club,
where I was as much at home as in my own house, all those in town
with whom I now and then had to transact business were good enough
to come. This penetration of strange hospitals was an agitating
adventure. Apart, however, from the mere physical nervousness
against which, as I say, I fought, there was another element in my
feelings with regard to Boyce's summons. If I talk about the Iron
Hand of Fate you may think I am using a cliche of melodrama.
Perhaps I am. But it expresses what I mean. Something unregenerate
in me, some lingering atavistic savage instinct towards freedom,
rebelled against this same Iron Hand of Fate that, first clapping
me on the shoulder long ago in Cape Town, was now dragging me,
against my will, into ever thickening entanglement with the dark
and crooked destiny of Leonard Boyce.

I tell you all this because I don't want to pose as a kind of
apodal angel of mercy.

I was also deadly anxious as to the nature of the communication
Boyce would make to me, before his mother should be informed of
his arrival in London. In spite of his frank confession, there was
still such a cloud of mystery over the man's soul as to render any
revelation possible. Had his hurt declared itself to be a mortal
one? Had he summoned me to unburden his conscience while yet there
was time? Was it going to be a repetition, with a difference, of
my last interview with Reggie Dacre? I worried myself with
unnecessary conjecture.

After a miserable drive through February rain and slush, I reached
my destination in Belton Square, a large mansion, presumably
equipped by its owner as a hospital for officers, and given over
to the nation. A telephone message had prepared the authorities
for my arrival. Marigold, preceded by the Sister in charge,
carried me across a tesselated hall and began to ascend the broad
staircase.

I uttered a little gasp and looked around me, for in a flash I
realised where I was. Twenty years ago I had danced in this house.
I had danced here with my wife before we were married. On the half
landing we had sat out together. It was the town house of the late
Lord Madelow, with whose wife I shared the acquaintance of a
couple of hundred young dancing men inscribed on her party list.
Both were dead long since. To whom the house belonged now I did
not know. But I recognised pictures and statuary and a
conservatory with palms. And the place shimmered with brilliant
ghosts and was haunted by hot perfumes and by the echo of human
voices and by elfin music. And the cripple forgot that he was
being carried up the stairs in the grip of the old soldier. He was
mounting them with heart beating high and the presence of a
beloved hand on his arm. ... You see, it was all so sudden. It
took my breath away and sent my mind whirling back over twenty
years.

It was like awaking from a dream to find a door flung open in
front of me and to hear the Sister announce my name. I was on the
threshold not of a ward, but of a well-appointed private room
fairly high up and facing the square, for the first thing I saw
was the tops of the leafless trees through the windows. Then I was
conscious of a cheery fire. The last thing I took in was the bed
running at right angles to door and window, and Leonard Boyce
lying in it with bandages about his face. For the dazed second or
two he seemed to be Reggie Dacre over again. But he had thrown
back the bedclothes and his broad chest and great arms were free.
His pleasant voice rang out at once.

"Hallo! Hallo! You are a good Samaritan. Is that you, Marigold?
There's a comfortable chair by the bedside for Major Meredyth."

He seemed remarkably strong and hearty; far from any danger of
death. Stubs of cigarettes were lying in an ash-tray on the bed.
In a moment or two they settled me down and left me alone with
him.

As soon as he heard the click of the door he said:

"I've done more than I set out to do. You remember our
conversation. I said I should either get the V.C. or never see you
again. I've managed both."

"What do you mean?" I asked.

"I shall never see you or anybody else again, or a dog or a cat,
or a tree or a flower."

Then, for the first time the dreadful truth broke upon me.

"Good Heavens!" I cried. "Your eyes--?"

"Done in. Blind. It's a bit ironical, isn't it?" He laughed
bitterly.

What I said by way of sympathy and consolation is neither here nor
there. I spoke sincerely from my heart, for I felt overwhelmed by
the tragedy of it all. He stretched out his hand and grasped mine.

"I knew you wouldn't fail me. Your sort never does. You understand
now why I wanted you to come?--To prepare the old mother for the
shock. You've seen for yourself that I'm sound of wind and limb--
as fit as a fiddle. You can make it quite clear to her that I'm
not going to die yet awhile. And you can let her down easy on the
real matter. Tell her I'm as merry as possible and looking forward
to going about Wellingsford with a dog and string."

"You're a brave chap, Boyce," I said.

He laughed again. "You're anticipating. Do you remember what I
said when you asked me what I should do if I won all the pots I
set my heart on and came through alive? I said I should begin to
try to be a brave man. God! It's a tough proposition. But it's
something to live for, anyway."

I asked him how it happened.

"I got sick," he replied, "of bearing a charmed life and nothing
happening. The Bosch shell or bullet that could hit me wasn't
made. I could stroll about freely where it was death for anyone
else to show the top of his head. I didn't care. Then suddenly one
day things went wrong. You know what I mean. I nearly let my
regiment down. It was touch and go. And it was touch and go with
my career. I just pulled through, however. I'll tell you all about
it one of these days--if you'll put up with me."

Again the familiar twitch of the lips which looked ghastly below
the bandaged eyes. "No one ever dreamed of the hell I went
through. Then I found I was losing the nerve I had built up all
these months. I nearly went off my head. At last I thought I would
put an end to it. It was a small attack of ours that had failed.
The men poured back over the parapet into the trench, leaving
heaven knows how many dead and wounded outside. I'm not
superstitious and I don't believe in premonitions and warnings,
and so forth; but in cases of waiting like mine a man suddenly
gets to know that his hour has come. ... I got in six wounded. Two
men were shot while I was carrying them. How I lived God knows. It
was cold hell. My clothes were torn to rags. As I was going for
the seventh, the knob of my life-preserver was shot away and my
wrist nearly broken. I wore it with a strap, you know. The
infernal thing had been a kind of mascot. When I realised it was
gone I just stood still and shivered in a sudden, helpless funk.
The seventh man was crawling up to me. He had a bloody face and
one dragging leg. That's my last picture of God's earth. Before I
could do anything--I must have been standing sideways on--a
bullet got me across the bridge of the nose and night came down
like a black curtain. Then I ran like a hare. Sometimes I tripped
over a man, dead or wounded, and fell on my head. I don't remember
much about this part of it. They told me afterwards. At last I
stumbled on to the parapet and some plucky fellow got me into the
trench. It was the regulation V.C. business," he added, "and so
they gave it to me."

"Specially," said I.

"Consolation prize, I suppose, for losing my sight. They had just
time to get me away behind when the Germans counter attacked. If I
hadn't brought the six men in, they wouldn't have had a dog's
chance. I did save their lives. That's something to the credit
side of the infernal balance."

"There can be no balance now, my dear chap," said I. "God knows
you've paid in full."

He lifted his hand and dropped it with a despairing gesture.

"There's only one payment in full. That was denied me. God, or
whoever was responsible, had my eyes knocked out, and made it
impossible for ever. He or somebody must be enjoying the farce."

"That's all very well," said I. "A man can do no more than his
utmost--as you've done. He must be content to leave the rest in
the hands of the Almighty."

"The Almighty has got a down on me," he replied. "And I don't
blame Him. Of course, from your point of view, you're right.
You're a normal, honourable soldier and gentleman. Anything you've
got to reproach yourself with is of very little importance. But
I'm an accursed freak. I told you all about it when you held me up
over the South African affair. There were other affairs after
that. Others again in this war. Haven't I just told you I let my
regiment down?"

"Don't, my dear man, don't!" I cried, in great pain, for it was
horrible to hear a man talk like this. "Can't you see you've wiped
out everything?"

"There's one thing at any rate I can't ever wipe out," he said in
a low voice. Then he laughed. "I've got to stick it. It may be
amusing to see how it all pans out. I suppose the very last
passion left us is curiosity."

"There's also the unconquerable soul," said I.

"You're very comforting," said he. "If I were in your place, I'd
leave a chap like me to the worms." He drew a long breath. "I
suppose I'll pull through all right."

"Of course you will," said I.

"I feel tons better, thanks to you, already."

"That's right," said I.

He fumbled for the box of cigarettes on the bed. Instinctively I
tried to help him, but I was tied to my fixed chair. It was a
trivial occasion; but I have never been so terrified by the sense
of helplessness. Just think of it. Two men of clear brain and, to
all intents and purposes, of sound bodily health, unable to reach
an object a few feet away. Boyce uttered an impatient exclamation.

"Get hold of that box for me, like a good chap," he said, his
fingers groping wide of the mark.

"I can't move," said I.

"Good Lord! I forgot."

He began to laugh. I laughed, too. We laughed like fools and the
tears ran down my cheeks. I suppose we were on the verge of
hysterics.

I pulled myself together and gave him a cigarette from my case.
And then, stretch as I would, I could not reach far enough to
apply the match to the end of the cigarette between his lips. He
was unable to lift his head. I lit another match and, like an
idiot, put it between his fingers. He nearly burned his moustache
and his bandage, and would have burned his fingers had not the
match--a wooden one--providentially gone out. Then I lit a
cigarette myself and handed it to him.

The incident, as I say, was trivial, but it had deep symbolic
significance. All symbols in their literal objectivity are
trivial. What more trivial than the eating of a bit of bread and
the sipping from a cup of wine? This trumpery business with the
cigarette revolutionised my whole feelings towards Boyce. It
initiated us into a sacred brotherhood. Hitherto, it had been his
nature which had reached out towards me tentacles of despair. My
inner self, as I have tried to show you, had never responded. It
was restrained by all kinds of doubts, suspicions, and repulsions.
Now, suddenly, it broke through all those barriers and rushed
forth to meet him. My death in life against which I had fought, I
hope like a brave man (it takes a bit of fighting) for many years,
would henceforth be his death in life, at whose terrors he too
would have to snap a disdainful finger. I had felt deep pity for
him; but if pity is indeed akin to love, it is a very poor
relation. Now I had cast pity and such like superior sentiment
aside and accepted him as a sworn brother. The sins, whatever they
were, that lay on the man's conscience mattered nothing. He had
paid in splendid penance and in terrible penalty.

I should have liked to express to him something of this surge of
emotion. But I could find no words. As a race, our emotions are
not facile, and therefore we lack the necessary practice in
expressing them. When they do come, they come all of a heap and
scare us out of our wits and leave us speechless. So the immediate
outcome of all this psychological upheaval was that we went on
smoking and said nothing more about it. As far as I remember we
started talking about the recruiting muddle, as to which our views
most vigorously coincided.

We parted cheerily. It was only when I got outside the room that
the ghastly irony of the situation again made my heart as lead. We
passed by the conservatory and the statuary and down the great
staircase, but the ghosts had gone. Yet I cast a wistful glance at
the spot--it was just under that Cuyp with the flashing white
horse--where we had sat twenty years ago. But the new tragedy had
rendered the memory less poignant.

"It's a dreadful thing about the Colonel, sir," said Marigold as
we drove off.

"More dreadful than anyone can imagine," said I.

"What he's going to do with himself is what I'm wondering," said
Marigold.

What indeed? The question went infinitely deeper than the
practical dreams of Marigold's philosophy. My honest fellow saw
but the outside--the full-blooded man of action cabined in his
lifelong darkness. I, to whom chance had revealed more, trembled
at the contemplation of his future. The man, goaded by the Furies,
had rushed into the jaws of death. Those jaws, by some divine
ordinance, had ruthlessly closed against him. The Furies meanwhile
attended him unrelenting. Whither now would they goad him? Into
madness? I doubted it. In spite of his contradictory nature, he
did not seem to be the sort of man who would go mad. He could
exercise over himself too reasoned a control. Yet here were
passions and despairs seething without an outlet. What would be
the end? It is true that he had achieved glory. To the end of his
life, wherever he went, he would command the honour and admiration
of men. Greater achievement is granted to few mortals. In our
little town he would be the Great Hero. But would all that human
sympathy and veneration could contrive keep the Furies at bay and
soothe the tormented spirit?

I tried to eat a meal at the club, but the food choked me. I got
into the car as soon as possible and reached Wellingsford with
head and heart racked with pain. But before I could go home I had
to execute Boyce's mission.

If I accomplished it successfully, my heart and not my wearied
mind deserves the credit. At first Mrs. Boyce broke down under the
shock of the news, for all the preparation in the world can do
little to soften a deadly blow; but breed and pride soon asserted
themselves, and she faced things bravely. With charming dignity
she received Marigold's few respectful words of condolence. And
she thanked me for what I had done, beyond my deserts. To show how
brave she was, she insisted on accompanying us downstairs and on
standing in the bleak evening air while Marigold put me in the
car.

"After all, I have my son alive and in good strong health. I must
realise how merciful God has been to me." She put her hand into
mine. "I shan't see you again till I bring him home with me. I
shall go up to London early to-morrow morning and stay with my old
friend Lady Fanshawe--I think you have met her here--the widow of
the late Admiral Fanshawe. She has a house in Eccleston Street,
which is, I think, in the neighbourhood of Belton Square. If I
haven't thanked you enough, dear Major Meredyth, it is that, when
one's heart is full, one can't do everything all at once."

She waved to me very graciously as the car drove off--a true
"Spartian" mother, dear lady, of our modern England.

Oh! the humiliation of possessing a frail body and a lot of
disorganized nerves! When I got home Marigold, seeing that I was
overtired, was all for putting me to bed then and there. I spurned
the insulting proposal in language plain enough even to his wooden
understanding. Sometimes his imperturbability exasperated me. I
might just as well try to taunt a poker or sting a fire-shovel
into resentment of personal abuse.

"I'll see you hanged, drawn, and quartered before I'll go to bed,"
I declared.

"Very good, sir." The gaunt wretch was carrying me. "But I think
you might lie down for half an hour before dinner."

He deposited me ignominiously on the bed and left the room. In
about ten minutes Dr. Cliffe, my inveterate adversary who has kept
life in me for many a year, came in with his confounded pink
smiling face.

"What's this I hear? Been overdoing it?"

"What the deuce are you doing here?" I cried. "Go away. How dare
you come when you're not wanted?"

He grinned. "I'm wanted right enough, old man. The good Marigold's
never at fault. He rang me up and I slipped round at once."

"One of these days," said I, "I'll murder that fellow."

He replied by gagging me with his beastly thermometer. Then he
felt my pulse and listened to my heart and stuck his fingers into
the corners of my eyes, so as to look at the whites; and when he
was quite satisfied with himself--there is only one animal more
self-complacent than your medical man in such circumstances, and
that is a dog who has gorged himself with surreptitious meat--he
ordained that I should forthwith go properly to bed and stay there
and be perfectly quiet until he came again, and in the meanwhile
swallow some filthy medicine which he would send round.

"One of these days," said he, rebukingly, "instead of murdering
your devoted Sergeant, you'll be murdering yourself, if you go on
such lunatic excursions. Of course I'm shocked at hearing about
Colonel Boyce, and I'm sorry for the poor lady, but why you should
have been made to half kill yourself over the matter is more than
I can understand."

"I happen," said I, "to be his only intimate friend in the place."

"You happen," he retorted, "to be a chronic invalid and the most
infernal worry of my life."

"You're nothing but an overbearing bully," said I.

He grinned again. That is what I have to put up with. If I curse
Marigold, he takes no notice. If I curse Cliffe, he grins. Yet
what I should do without them, Heaven only knows.

"God bless 'em both," said I, when my aching body was between the
cool sheets.

Although it was none of his duties, Marigold brought me in a light
supper, fish and a glass of champagne. Never a parlour-maid would
he allow to approach me when I was unwell. I often wondered what
would happen if I were really ill and required the attendance of a
nurse. I swear no nurse's touch could be so gentle as when he
raised me on the pillows. He bent over the tray on the table by
the bed and began to dissect out the back-bone of the sole.

"I can do that," said I, fretfully.

He cocked a solitary reproachful eye on me. I burst out laughing.
He looked so dear and ridiculous with his preposterous curly wig
and his battered face. He went on with his task.

"I wonder, Marigold," said I, "how you put up with me."

He did not reply until he had placed the neatly arranged tray
across my body.

"I've never heard, sir," said he, "as how a man couldn't put up
with his blessings."

A bit of sole was on my fork and I was about to convey it to my
mouth, but there came a sudden lump in my throat and I put the
fork down.

"But what about the curses?"

A horrible contortion of the face and a guttural rumble indicated
amusement on the part of Marigold. I stared, very serious, having
been profoundly touched.

"What are you laughing at?" I asked.

The idiot's merriment increased in vehemence. He said: "You're too
funny, sir," and just bolted, in a manner unbecoming not only to a
sergeant, but even to a butler.

As I mused on this unprecedented occurrence, I made a discovery,--
that of Sergeant Marigold's sense of humour. To that sense of
humour my upbraidings, often, I must confess, couched in
picturesque and figurative terms so as not too greatly to hurt his
feelings, had made constant appeal for the past fifteen years.
Hitherto he had hidden all signs of humorous titillation behind
his impassive mask. To-night, a spark of sentiment had been the
match to explode the mine of his mirth. It was a serious position.
Here had I been wasting on him half a lifetime's choicest
objurgations. What was I to do in the future to consolidate my
authority?

I never enjoyed a fried sole and a glass of champagne more in my
life.

He came in later to remove the tray, as wooden as ever.

"Mrs. Connor called a little while ago, sir."

"Why didn't you ask her to come in to see me?"

"Doctor's orders, sir."

After the sole and champagne, I felt much better. I should have
welcomed my dear Betty with delight. That, at any rate, was my
first impulsive thought.

"Confound the doctor!" I cried. And I was going to confound
Marigold, too, but I caught his steady luminous eye. What was the
use of any anathema when he would only take it away, as a dog does
a bone, and enjoy it in a solitary corner? I recovered myself.

"Well?" said I, with dignity. "Did Mrs. Connor leave any message?"

"I was to give you her compliments, sir, and say she was sorry you
were so unwell and she was shocked to hear of Colonel Boyce's sad
affliction."

This was sheer orderly room. Such an expression as "sad
affliction" never passed Betty's lips. I, however, had nothing to
say. Marigold settled me for the night and left me.

When I was alone and able to consider the point, I felt a cowardly
gratitude towards the doctor who had put me to bed like a sick man
and forbidden access to my room. I had been spared breaking the
news to Betty. How she received it, I did not know. It had been
impossible to question Marigold. After all, it was a matter of no
essential moment. I consoled myself with the reflection and tried
to go to sleep. But I passed a wretched night, my head whirling
with the day's happenings.

The morning papers showed me that Boyce, wishing to spare his
mother, had been wise to summon me at once. They all published an
official paragraph describing the act for which he had received
his distinction, and announcing the fact of his blindness. They
also gave a brief and flattering sketch of his career. One paper
devoted to him a short leading article. The illustrated papers
published his photograph. Boyce was on the road to becoming a
popular hero.

Cliffe kept me in bed all that day, to my great irritation. I had
no converse with the outside world, save vicariously with Betty,
who rang up to enquire after my health. On the following morning,
when I drove abroad with Hosea, I found the whole town ringing
with Boyce. It was a Friday, the day of publication of the local
newspaper. It had run to extravagant bills all over the place:

"Wellingsford Hero honoured by the King. Tragic End to Glorious
Deeds."

The word--Marigold's, I suppose--had gone round that I had visited
the hero in London. I was stopped half a dozen times on my way up
the High Street by folks eager for personal details. Outside
Prettilove the hairdresser's I held quite a little reception, and
instead of moving me on for blocking the traffic, as any of his
London colleagues would have done, the local police sergeant sank
his authority and by the side of a butcher's boy formed part of
the assembly.

When I got to the Market Square, I saw Sir Anthony Fenimore's car
standing outside the Town Hall. The chauffeur stopped me.

"Sir Anthony was going to call on you, sir, as soon as he had
finished his business inside."

"I'll wait for him," said I. It was one of the few mild days of a
wretched month and I enjoyed the air. Springfield, the house
agent, passed and engaged me in conversation on the absorbing
topic, and then the manager of the gasworks joined us. Everyone
listened so reverently to my utterances that I began to feel as if
I had won the Victoria Cross myself.

Presently Sir Anthony bustled out of the Town Hall, pink, brisk,
full of business. At the august appearance of the Mayor my less
civically distinguished friends departed. His eyes brightened as
they fell on me and he shook hands vigorously.

"My dear Duncan, I was just on my way to you. Only heard this
morning that you've been seedy. Knocked up, I suppose, by your
journey to town. Just heard of that, too. Must have thought me a
brute not to enquire. But Edith and I didn't know. I was away all
yesterday. These infernal tribunals. With the example of men like
Leonard Boyce before their eyes, it makes one sick to look at
able-bodied young Englishmen trying to wriggle out of their duty
to the country. Well, dear old chap, how are you?"

I assured him that I had recovered from Cliffe and was in my usual
state of health. He rubbed his hands.

"That's good. Now give me all the news. What is Boyce's condition?
When will he be able to be moved? When do you think he'll come
back to Wellingsford?"

At this series of questions I pricked a curious ear.

"Am I speaking to the man or the Mayor?"

"The Mayor," said he. "I wish to goodness I could get you inside,
so that you and I and Winterbotham could talk things over."

Winterbotham was the Town Clerk. Sir Anthony cast an instinctive
glance at his chauffeur, a little withered elderly man. I laughed
and made a sign of dissent. When you have to be carried about, you
shy at the prospect of little withered, elderly men as carriers.
Besides--

"Unless it would lower Winterbotham's dignity or give him a cold
in the head," said I, "why shouldn't he come out here?"

Sir Anthony crossed the pavement briskly, gave a message to the
doorkeeper of the Town Hall, and returned to Hosea and myself.

"It's a dreadful thing. Dreadful. I never realised till yesterday,
when I read his record, what a distinguished soldier he was. A
modern Bayard. For the last year or so he seemed to put my back
up. Behaved in rather a curious way, never came near the house
where once he was always welcome, and when I asked him to dinner
he turned me down flat. But that's all over. Sometimes one has
these pettifogging personal vanities. The best thing is to be
heartily ashamed of 'em like an honest man, and throw 'em out in
the dung-heap where they belong. That's what I told Edith last
night, and she agreed with me. Don't you?"

I smiled. Here was another typical English gentleman ridding his
conscience of an injustice done to Leonard Boyce.

"Of course I do," said I. "Boyce is a queer fellow. A man with his
exceptional qualities has to be judged in an exceptional way."

"And then," said Sir Anthony, "it's that poor dear old lady that
I've been thinking of. Edith went to see her yesterday afternoon,
but found she had gone up to London. In her frail health it's
enough to kill her."

"It won't," said I. "A woman doesn't give birth to a lion without
having something of the lion in her nature."

"I've never thought of that," said Sir Anthony.

"Haven't you?"

His face turned grave and he looked far away over the red-brick
post-office on the opposite side of the square. Then he sighed,
looked at me with a smile, and nodded.

"You're right, Duncan."

"I know I am," said I. "I broke the news to Mrs. Boyce. That's why
he asked me to go up and see him."

Winterbotham appeared--a tall, cadaverous man in a fur coat and a
soft felt hat. He shook hands with me in a melancholy way. In a
humbler walk of life, I am sure he would have been an undertaker.

"Now," said Sir Anthony, "tell us all about your interview with
Boyce."

"Before I commit myself," said I, "with the Civic Authorities,
will you kindly inform me what this conference coram publico is
all about?"

"Why, my dear chap, haven't I told you?" cried Sir Anthony. "We're
going to give Colonel Boyce a Civic Reception."





CHAPTER XIX


Thenceforward nothing was talked of but the home-coming of Colonel
Boyce. He touched the public imagination. All kinds of stories,
some apocryphal, some having a basis of truth, some authentic,
went the round of the little place. It simmered with martial
fervour. Elderly laggards enrolled themselves in the Volunteer
Training Corps. Young married men who had not attested under the
Derby Scheme rushed out to enlist. The Tribunal languished in
idleness for lack of claimants for exemption. Exempted men, with
the enthusiastic backing of employers, lost the sense of their
indispensability and joined the colours. An energetic lady who had
met the Serbian Minister in London conceived the happy idea of
organising a Serbian Flag Day in Wellingsford, and reaped a
prodigious harvest. We were all tremendously patriotic, living
under Boyce's reflected glory.

At first I had deprecated the proposal, fearing lest Boyce might
not find it acceptable. The reputation he had sought at the
cannon's mouth was a bubble of a different kind from that which
the good townsfolk were eager to celebrate. Vanity had no part in
it. For what the outer world thought of his exploits he did not
care a penny. He was past caring. His soul alone, for its own sore
needs, had driven him to the search. Before his own soul and not
before his fellow countrymen, had he craved to parade as a
recipient of the Victoria Cross. His own soul, as I knew, not
being satisfied, he would shrink from obtaining popular applause
under false pretences. No unhappy man ever took sterner measure of
himself. Of all this no one but myself had the faintest idea. In
explaining my opinion I had to leave out all essentials. I could
only hint that a sensitive man like Colonel Boyce might be averse
from exhibiting in public his physical disabilities; that he had
always shown himself a modest soldier with a dislike of self-
advertisement; that he would prefer to seek immediate refuge in
the quietude of his home. But they would not listen to me. Colonel
Boyce, they said, would be too patriotic to refuse the town's
recognition. It was part of the game which he, as a brave soldier,
no matter how modest, could not fail to play. He would recognise
that such public honourings of valour had widespread effect among
the population. In face of such arguments I had to withdraw my
opposition; otherwise it might have appeared that I was actuated
by petty personal motives. God knows I only desired to save Boyce
from undergoing a difficult ordeal. For the same reasons I could
not refuse to serve on the Reception Committee which was
immediately formed under the chairmanship of the Mayor.

Preliminaries having been discussed, the Mayor and the Town Clerk
waited on Boyce in Belton Square, and returned with the triumphant
tidings that they had succeeded in their mission.

"I can't make out what you were running your head against,
Duncan," said Sir Anthony. "Of course, as you say, he's a modest
chap and dislikes publicity. So do we all. But I quickly talked
him out of that objection. I talked him out of all sorts of
objections before he could raise them. At last what do you think
he said?"

"I should have told you to go to blazes and not worry me."

"He didn't. He said--now I like the chap for it, it was so simple
and honest--he said: 'If I were alone in the world I wouldn't have
it, for I don't like it. But I'll accept on one condition. My poor
old mother has had rather a thin time and she's going to have a
thinner. She never gets a look in. Make it as far as possible her
show, and I'll do what you like.' What do you think of that?"

"I think it's very characteristic," said I.

And it was. In my mental survey of the situation from Boyce's
point of view I had not taken into account the best and finest in
the man. His reason rang true against my exceptional knowledge of
him. I had worked myself into so sympathetic a comprehension that
I KNEW he would be facing something unknown and terrible in the
proposed ceremony; I KNEW that for his own sake he would have
unequivocably declined. But, ad najorem matris gloriam, he
assented.

The main question, at any rate, was settled. The hero would accept
the honour. It was for the Committee to make the necessary
arrangements. We corresponded far and wide in order to obtain
municipal precedents. We had interviews with the military and
railway authorities. We were in constant communication with the
local Volunteer Training Corps; with the Godbury Volunteers and
the Godbury School O.T.C., who both desired to take a part in the
great event. In compliance with the conditions imposed, we gave as
much publicity as we could to Mrs. Boyce. Lieutenant Colonel
Boyce, V.C., and Mrs. Boyce were officially associated in the
programme of the reception. How to disentangle them afterwards,
when the presentation of the address, engrossed on velluni and
enclosed in a casket, should be made to the Colonel, was the
subject of heated and confused discussion. Then the feminine
elements in town and county desired to rally to the side of Mrs.
Boyce. The Red Cross and Volunteer Aid Detachment Nurses claimed
representation. So did the munitions workers of Godbury. The
Countess of Laleham, the wife of the Lord Lieutenant of the
County, a most imposing and masterful woman, signified (in genteel
though incisive language) her intention to take a leading part in
the proceedings and to bring along her husband, apparently as an
unofficial ornament. This, of course, upset our plans, which had
all to be reconsidered from the beginning.

"Who is giving the reception?" cried Lady Fenimore, who could
stand upon her dignity as well as anybody. "The County or
Wellingsford? I presume it's Wellingsford, and, so long as I am
Mayoress, that dreadful Laleham woman will have to take a back
seat."

So, you see, we had our hands full.

All this time I found Betty curiously elusive. Now and then I met
her for a few fugitive moments at the hospital. Twice she ran in
for dinner, in uniform, desperately busy, arriving on the stroke
of the dinner hour and rushing away five minutes after her coffee
and cigarette, alleging as excuse the epidemic of influenza,
consequent on the vile weather, which had woefully reduced the
hospital staff. She seemed to be feverish and ill at ease, and
tried to cover the symptoms by a reversion to her old offhand
manner. As I was so seldom alone with her I could find scant
opportunity for intimate conversation. I thought that she might
have regretted the frank exposition of her feelings regarding
Leonard Boyce. But she showed no sign of it. She spoke in the most
detached way of his blindness and the coming ceremony. Never once,
even on the first occasion when I met her--in the hospital
corridor--after my return from London, did her attitude vary from
that of any kind-hearted Englishwoman who deplores the mutilation
of a gallant social acquaintance. Sometimes I wanted to shake her,
though I could scarcely tell why. I certainly would not have had
her weep on my shoulder over Boyce's misfortune; nor would I have
cared for her to exhibit a vindictive callousness. She behaved
with perfect propriety. Perhaps that is what disturbed me. I was
not accustomed to associate perfect propriety with my dear Betty.

The days went on. The reception arrangements were perfected. We
only waited for the date of Boyce's arrival to be fixed. That
depended on the date of the particular Investiture by the King
which Boyce's convalescence should allow him to attend. At last
the date was fixed.

A few days before the Investiture I went to London and called at
Lady Fanshawe's in Eccleston Street, whither he had been removed
after leaving the hospital. I was received in the dining-room on
the ground floor by Boyce and his mother. He wore black glasses to
hide terrible disfigurement--he lifted them to show me. One eye
had been extracted. The other was seared and sightless. He greeted
me as heartily as ever, made little jests over his infirmity,
treating it lightly for his mother's sake. She, on her side,
deemed it her duty to exhibit equal cheerfulness. She boasted of
his progress in self-reliance and in the accomplishment of various
little blind man's tricks. At her bidding he lit a cigarette for
my benefit, by means of a patent fuse. He said, when he had
succeeded:

"Better than the last time you saw me, eh, Meredyth?"

"What was that?" asked Mrs. Boyce.

"He nearly burned his fingers," said I, shortly. I had no desire
to relate the incident.

We talked of the coming ceremony and I gave them the details of
the programme. Boyce had been right in accepting on the score of
his mother. Only once had she been the central figure in any
public ceremony--on her wedding day, in the years long ago. Here
was a new kind of wedding day in her old age. The prospect filled
her with a tremulous joy which was to both of them a compensation.
She bubbled over with pride and excitement at her inclusion in the
homage that was to be paid to the valour of her only son.

"After all," she said, "I did bring him into the world. So I can
claim some credit. I only hope I shan't cry and make a fool of
myself. They won't expect me to keep on bowing, will they? I once
saw Queen Victoria driving through the streets, and I thought how
dreadfully her poor old neck must have ached."

On the latter point I reassured her. On the drive from the station
Boyce would take the salute of the troops on the line of route. If
she smiled charmingly on them, their hearts would be satisfied,
and if she just nodded at them occasionally in a motherly sort of
way, they would be enchanted. She informed me that she was having
a new dress made for the occasion. She had also bought a new hat,
which I must see. A servant was summoned and dispatched for it.
She tried it on girlishly before the mirror over the mantelpiece,
and received my compliments.

"Tell me what it looks like," said Boyce.

You might as well ask a savage in Central Africa to describe the
interior of a submarine as the ordinary man to describe a woman's
hat. My artless endeavours caused considerable merriment. To hear
Boyce's gay laughter one would have thought he had never a care in
the world ...

When I took my leave, Mrs. Boyce accompanied Marigold and myself
to the front door.

"Did you ever hear of anything so dreadful?" she whispered, and I
saw her lips quivering and the tears rolling down her cheeks. "If
he weren't so brave and wonderful, I should break my heart."

"What do you suppose you are yourself, my dear old friend," said I
over Marigold's shoulder.

I went away greatly comforted. Both of them were as brave as could
be. For the first time I took a more cheerful view of Boyce's
future.

On the evening before the Reception Betty was shown into the
library. It was late, getting on towards my bedtime, and I was
nodding in front of the fire.

"I'm just in and out, Majy dear," she said. "I had to come. I
didn't want to give you too many shocks." At my expression of
alarm, she laughed. "I've only run in to tell you that I've made
up my mind to come to the Town Hall tomorrow."

I looked at her, and I suppose my hands moved in a slight gesture.

"By that," she said, "I suppose you mean you can never tell what
I'm going to do next."

"You've guessed it, my dear," said I.

"Do you disapprove?"

"I couldn't be so presumptuous."

She bent over me and caught the lapels of my jacket.

"Oh, don't be so dreadfully dignified. I want you to understand.
Everybody is going to pay honour to-morrow to a man who has given
everything he could to his country. Don't you think it would be
petty of me if I stood out? What have the dead things that have
passed between us to do with my tribute as an Englishwoman?"

What indeed? I asked her whether she was attending in her private
capacity or as one of the representatives of the V.A.D. nurses. I
learned for the thousandth time that Betty Connor did not deal in
half measures. If she went at all, it was as Betty Connor that she
would go. Her aunts would accompany her. It was part of the
municipal ordering of things that the Town Clerk should have sent
them the special cards of invitation.

"I think it my duty to go," said Betty.

"If you think so, my dear," said I, "then it is your duty. So
there's nothing more to be said about it."

Betty kissed the top of my head and went off.

We come now to the morning of the great day. Everything had been
finally settled. The Mayor and Aldermen, Lady Fenimore and the
Aldermen's wives, the Lord Lieutenant (in unofficial mufti) and
Lady Laleham (great though officially obscure lady), the General
of the Division quartered in the neighbourhood and officers of his
staff, and a few other magnates to meet the three o'clock train by
which the Boyces were due to arrive. The station hung with flags
and inscriptions. A guard of honour and a band in the station-
yard, with a fleet of motor cars in waiting. Troops lining the
route from station to Town Hall. More troops in the decorated
Market Square, including the Godbury School O.T.C. and the
Wellingsford and Godbury Volunteers. I heard that the latter were
very anxious to fire off a feu de joie, but were restrained owing
to lack of precedent. The local fire-brigade in freshly burnished
helmets were to follow the procession of motor cars, and behind
them motor omnibuses with the nurses.

Marigold, although his attendance on me precluded him from taking
part in the parade of Volunteers, appeared in full grey uniform
with all his medals and the black patch of ceremony over his
eyeless socket. I must confess to regarding him with some
jealousy. I too should have liked to wear my decorations. If a man
swears to you that he is free from such little vanities, he is
more often than not a mere liar. But a broken-down old soldier,
although still drawing pay from the Government, is not allowed to
wear uniform (which I think is outrageous), and he can't go and
plaster himself with medals when he is wearing on his head a hard
felt hat. My envy of the martial looking Marigold is a proof that
my mind was not busied with sterner preoccupations. I ate my
breakfast with the serene conscience not only of a man who knows
he has done his duty, but of an organiser confident in the success
of his schemes. The abominable weather of snows and tempests from
which we had suffered for weeks had undergone a change. It was a
mild morning brightened by a pale convalescent sort of sun, and
there was just a little hope of spring in the air. I felt content
with everything and everybody.

About eleven o'clock the buzz of the library telephone disturbed
my comfortable perusal of the newspaper. I wheeled towards the
instrument. Sir Anthony was speaking.

"Can you come round at once? Very urgent. The car is on its way to
you."

"What's the matter?" I asked.

He could not tell me over the wires. I was to take it that my
presence was urgently needed.

"I'll come along at once," said I.

Some hitch doubtless had occurred. Perhaps the War Office (whose
ways were ever weird and unaccountable) had forbidden the General
to take part in such a village-pump demonstration. Perhaps Lady
Laleham had insisted on her husband coming down like a uniformed
Lord Lieutenant on the fold. Perhaps the hero himself was laid up
with measles.

With the lightest heart I drove to Wellings Park. Marigold,
straight as a ramrod, sitting in front by the chauffeur. As soon
as Pardoe, the butler, had brought out my chair and Marigold had
settled me in it, Sir Anthony, very red and flustered, appeared
and, shaking me nervously by the hand, said without preliminary
greeting:

"Come into the library."

He, I think, had come from the morning room on the right of the
hall. The library was on the left. He flung open the door. I
steered myself into the room; and there, standing on the white
bearskin hearthrug, his back to the fire, his hands in his
pockets, his six inches of stiff white beard stuck aggressively
outward, I saw Daniel Gedge.

While I gaped in astonishment, Sir Anthony shut the door behind
him, drew a straight-backed chair from the wall, planted it
roughly some distance away from the fire, and, pointing to it,
bade Gedge sit down. Gedge obeyed. Sir Anthony took the hearthrug
position, his hands behind his back, his legs apart.

"This man," said he, "has come to me with a ridiculous, beastly
story. At first I was undecided whether I should listen to him or
kick him out. I thought it wiser to listen to him in the presence
of a reputable witness. That's why I've sent for you, Duncan. Now
you just begin all over again, my man," said he, turning to Gedge,
"and remember that anything you say here will be used against you
at your trial."

Gedge laughed--I must admit, with some justification.

"You forget, Sir Anthony, I'm not a criminal and you're not a
policeman."

"I'm the Mayor to this town, sir," cried Sir Anthony. "I'm also a
Justice of the Peace."

"And I'm a law-abiding citizen," retorted Gedge.

"You're an infernal socialistic pro-German," exclaimed Sir
Anthony.

"Prove it. I only ask you to prove it. No matter what my private
opinions may be, you just try to bring me up under the Defence of
the Realm Act, and you'll find you can't touch me."

I held out a hand. "Forgive me for interrupting," said I, "but
what is all this discussion about?"

Gedge crossed one leg over the other and drew his beard through
his fingers. Sir Anthony was about to burst into speech, but I
checked him with a gesture and turned to Gedge.

"It has nothing to do with political opinions," said he. "It has
to do with the death, nearly two years ago, of Miss Althea
Fenimore, Sir Anthony's only daughter."

Sir Anthony, his face congested, glared at him malevolently. I
started, with a gasp of surprise, and stared at the man who,
caressing his beard, looked from one to the other of us with an
air of satisfaction.

"Get on," said Sir Anthony.

"You are going to give a civic reception to-day to Colonel Boyce,
V.C., aren't you?"

"Yes, I am," snapped Sir Anthony.

"Do you think you ought to do it when I tell you that Colonel
Boyce, V.C., murdered Miss Althea Fenimore on the night of the
25th June, two years ago?"

"Yes," said Sir Anthony. "And do you know why? Because I know you
to be a liar and a scoundrel."

I can never describe the awful horror that numbed me to the heart.
For a few moments my body seemed as lifeless as my legs. The
charge, astounding almost to grotesqueness in the eyes of Sir
Anthony, and rousing him to mere wrath, deprived me of the power
of speech. For I knew, in that dreadful instant, that the man's
words contained some elements of truth.

All the pieces of the puzzle that had worried me at odd times for
months fitted themselves together in a vivid flash. Boyce and
Althea! I had never dreamed of associating their names. That
association was the key of the puzzle. Out of the darkness
disturbing things shone clear. Boyce's abrupt retirement from
Wellingsford before the war; his cancellation by default of his
engagement; his morbid desire, a year ago, to keep secret his
presence in his own house; Gedge's veiled threat to me in the
street to use a way "that'll knock all you great people of
Wellingsford off your high horses;" his extraordinary interview
with Boyce; his generally expressed hatred of Boyce. Was this too
the secret which he let out in his cups to Randall Holmes and
which drove the young man from his society? And Betty? Boyce was a
devil. She wished he were dead. And her words: "You have behaved
worse to others. I don't wonder at your shrinking from showing
your face here." How much did Betty know? There was the lost week
--in Carlisle?--in poor Althea's life. And then there were Boyce's
half confessions, the glimpses he had afforded me into the
tormented soul. To me he had condemned himself out of his own
mouth.

I repeat that, sitting there paralysed by the sudden shock of it,
I knew--not that the man was speaking the literal truth--God
forbid!--but that Boyce was, in some degree, responsible for
Althea's death.

 "Calling me names won't alter the facts, Sir Anthony," said
Gedge, with a touch of insolence. "I was there at the time. I saw
it."

"If that's true," Sir Anthony retorted, "you're an accessory after
the fact, and in greater danger of being hanged than ever." He
turned to me in his abrupt way. "Now that we've heard this
blackguard, shall we hand him over to the police?"

Being directly addressed, I recovered my nerve.

"Before doing that," said I, "perhaps it would be best for us to
hear what kind of a story he has to tell us. We should also like
to know his motives in not denouncing the supposed murderer at
once, and in keeping his knowledge hidden all this time."

"With regard to the last part of your remarks, I dare say you
would," said Gedge. "Only I don't know whether I'll go so far as
to oblige you. Anyhow you may have discovered that I don't
particularly care about your class. I've been preaching against
your idleness and vanity and vices, and the strangling grip you
have on the throats of the people, ever since I was a young man.
If one of your lot chose to do in another of your lot--a common
story of seduction and crime--"

At this slur in his daughter's honour Sir Anthony broke out
fiercely, and, for a moment, I feared lest he would throw himself
on Gedge and wring his neck. I managed to check his outburst and
bring him to reason. He resumed his attitude on the hearthrug.

"As I was saying," Gedge continued, rather frightened, "from my
sociological point of view I considered the affair no business of
mine. I speak of it now, because ever since war broke out your
class and the parasitical bourgeoisie have done your best to
reduce me to starvation. I thought it would be pleasant to get a
bit of my own back. Just a little bit," he added, rubbing his
hands.

"If you think you've done it, you'll find yourself mistaken."

Gedge shrugged his shoulders and pulled his beard. I hated the
light in his little crafty eyes. I feel sure he had been looking
forward for months to this moment of pure happiness.

"Having given us an insight into your motives, which seem
consistent with what we know of your character," said I,
judicially, "will you now make your statement of facts?"

"What's the good of listening further to his lies?" interrupted
Sir Anthony. "I'm a magistrate. I can give the police at once a
warrant for his arrest."

Again I pacified him. "Let us hear what the man has to say."

Gedge began. He spoke by the book, like one who repeats a
statement carefully prepared.

"It was past ten o'clock on the night of the 25th June, 1914. I
had just finished supper when I was rung up by the landlord of The
Three Feathers on the Farfield road--it's the inn about a quarter
of a mile from the lock gates. He said that the District Secretary
of the Red Democratic Federation was staying there--his brother-
in-law, if you want to know--and he hadn't received my report. I
must explain that I am the local secretary, and as there was to be
an important conference of the Federation at Derby the next day,
the District Secretary ought to have been in possession of my
report on local affairs. I had drawn up the report. My daughter
Phyllis had typed it, and she ought to have posted it. On
questioning her, I found she had neglected to do so. I explained
this over the wires and said I would bring the report at once to
The Three Feathers. I only tell you all this, in which you can't
be interested, so that you can't say: 'What were you doing on a
lonely road at that time of night?' My daughter and the landlord
of The Three Feathers can corroborate this part of my story. I set
out on my bicycle. It was bright moonlight. You know that for
about two hundred yards before the lock gate, and for about twenty
after, the towing-path is raised above the level of the main road
which runs parallel with it a few yards away. There are strips of
market garden between. When I got to this open bit I saw two
persons up on the towing-path. One was a girl with a loose kind of
cloak and a hat. The other was a man wearing a soft felt hat and a
light overcoat. The overcoat was open and I saw that he was
wearing it over evening dress. That caught my attention. What was
this swell in evening dress doing there with a girl? I slowed down
and dismounted. They didn't see me. I got into the shadow of a
whitethorn. They turned their faces so that the moon beat full on
them. I saw them as plain as I see you. They were Colonel Boyce,
V.C.,--Major then--and your daughter, Mr. Mayor, Miss Althea
Fenimore."

He paused as though to point the dramatic effect, and twisted
round, sticking out his horrible beard at Sir Anthony. Sir
Anthony, his hands thrust deep in his trouser-pockets and his
bullet head bent forward, glared at him balefully out of his old
blue eyes. But he said never a word. Gedge continued.

"They didn't speak very loud, so I could only hear a scrap or two
of their conversation. They seemed to be quarrelling--she wanted
him to do something which he wouldn't do. I heard the words
'marriage' and 'disgrace.' They stood still for a moment. Then
they turned back. I had overtaken them, you know. I remounted my
bicycle and rode to The Three Feathers. I was there about a
quarter of an hour or twenty minutes. Then I rode back for home.
When I came in sight of the lock, there I saw a man standing
alone, sharp in the moonlight. As I came nearer I recognised the
same man, Major Boyce. There were no lights in the lock-keeper's
cottage. He and his wife had gone to bed long before. I was so
interested that I forgot what I was doing and ran into the hedge
so that I nearly came down. There was the noise of the scrape and
drag of the machine which must have sounded very loud in the
stillness. It startled him, for he looked all round, but he didn't
see me, for I was under the hedge. Then suddenly he started
running. He ran as if the devil was after him. I saw him squash
down his Trilby hat so that it was shapeless. Then he disappeared
along the path. I thought this a queer proceeding. Why should he
have taken to his heels? I thought I should like to see him again.
If he kept to the towing-path, his shortest way home, he was bound
to go along the Chestnut Avenue, where, as you know, the road and
the path again come together. On a bicycle it was easy to get
there before him. I sat down on a bench and waited. Presently he
comes, walking fast, his hat still squashed in all over his ears.
I walked my bicycle slap in front of him.

"'Good-night, Major,' I said.

"He stared at me as if he didn't know me. Then he seemed to pull
himself together and said: 'Good-night, Gedge. What are you doing
out at this time of night?'

"'If it comes to that, sir,' said I, 'what are you?'

"Then he says, very haughty, as if I was the dirt under his feet--
I suppose, Sir Anthony Fenimore and Major Meredyth, you think that
me and my class are by divine prescription the dirt beneath your
feet, but you're damn well mistaken--then he says: 'What the devil
do you mean?' and catches hold of the front wheel of the bicycle
and swings it and me out of his way so that I had a nasty fall,
with the machine on top of me, and he marches off. I picked myself
up furious with anger. I am an elderly man and not accustomed to
that sort of treatment. I yelled out: 'What have you been doing
with the Squire's daughter on the towing-path?' It pulled him up
short. He made a step or two towards me, and again he asked me
what I meant. And this time I told him. He called me a liar, swore
he had never been on any tow-path or had seen any squire's
daughter, and threatened to murder me. As soon as I could mount my
bicycle I left him and made for home. The next afternoon, if you
remember, the unfortunate young lady's body was found at the
bottom of three fathoms of water by the lock gates."

He had spoken so clearly, so unfalteringly, that Sir Anthony had
been surprised into listening without interruption. The bull-dog
expression on his face never changed. When Gedge had come to the
end, he said:

"Will you again tell me your object in coming to me with this
disgusting story?"

Gedge lifted his bushy eyebrows. "Don't you believe it even now?"

"Not a word of it," replied Sir Anthony.

"I ought to remind you of another point." said Gedge. "Was Major
Boyce ever seen in Wellingsford after that night? No. He went off
by the first train the next morning. Went abroad and stayed there
till the outbreak of war."

"I happen to know he had made arrangements to start for Norway
that morning," said Sir Anthony. "He had called here a day or two
before to say good-bye."

"Did he write you any letter of condolence?" Gedge asked
sneeringly.

I saw a sudden spasm pass over Sir Anthony's features. But he said
in the same tone as before:

"I am not going to answer insolent questions."

Gedge turned to me with the air of a man giving up argument with a
child.

"What do you think of it, Major Meredyth?"

What could I say? I had kept a grim iron face all through the
proceedings. I could only reply:

"I agree entirely with Sir Anthony."

Gedge rose and thrust his hand into his jacket pocket. "You
gentlemen are hard to convince. If you want proof positive, just
read that." And he held a letter out to Sir Anthony.

Sir Anthony glared at him and abruptly plucked the letter out of
his hand; for the fraction of a second he stood irresolute; then
he threw it behind him into the blazing fire.

"Do you think I'm going to soil my mind with your dirty
forgeries?"

Gedge laughed. "You think you've queered my pitch, I suppose. You
haven't. I've heaps more incriminating letters. That was only a
sample."

"Publish one of them at your peril," said I.

"Pray, Mister Major Meredyth," said he, "what is to prevent me?"

"Penal servitude for malicious slander."

"I should win my case."

"In that event they would get you, on your own showing, for being
an accessory after the fact of murder, and for blackmail."

"Suppose I risk it?"

"You won't," said I.

Sir Anthony turned to the bell-push by the side of the
mantelpiece.

"What's the good of talking to this double-dyed scoundrel?" He
pointed to the door. "You infamous liar, get out. And if I ever
catch you prowling round this house, I'll set the dogs on you."

Gedge marched to the door and turned on the threshold and shook
his fist.

"You'll repent your folly till your dying day!"

"To Hell with you," cried Sir Anthony.

The door slammed. We were left alone. An avalanche of silence
overwhelmed us. Heaven knows how long we remained speechless and
motionless--I in my wheel-chair, he standing on the hearthrug
staring awfully in front of him. At last he drew a deep breath and
threw up his arms and flung himself down on a leather-covered
couch, where he sat, elbows on knees and his head in his hands.
After a while he lifted a drawn face.

"It's true, Duncan," said he, "and you know it."

"I don't know it," I replied stoutly, "any more than you do."

He rose in his nervous way and came swiftly to me and clapped both
his hands on my frail shoulders and bent over me--he was a little
man, as I have told you--and put his face so close to mine that I
could feel his breath on my cheek.

"Upon your soul as a Christian you know that man wasn't lying."

I looked into his eyes--about six inches from mine.

"Boyce never murdered Althea," I said.

"But he is the man--the man I've been looking for."

I pushed him away with both hands, using all my strength. It was
too horrible.

"Suppose he is. What then?"

He fell back a pace or two. "Once I remember saying: 'If ever I
get hold of that man--God help him!'"

He clenched his fists and started to pace up and down the library,
passing and repassing my chair. At last my nerves could stand it
no longer and I called on him to halt.

"Gedge's story is curiously incomplete," said I. "We ought to have
crossexamined him more closely. Is it likely that Boyce should
have gone off leaving behind him a witness of his crime whom he
had threatened to murder, and who he must have known would have
given information as soon as the death was discovered? And don't
you think Gedge's reason for holding his tongue very unconvincing?
His fool hatred of our class, instead of keeping him cynically
indifferent, would have made him lodge information at once and
gloat over our discomfiture."

I could not choose but come to the defence of the unhappy man whom
I had learned to call my friend, although, for all my trying, I
could conjure up no doubt as to his intimate relation with the
tragedy. As Sir Anthony did not speak, I went on.

"You can't judge a man with Leonard Boyce's record on the EX PARTE
statement of a malevolent beast like Gedge. Look back. If there
had been any affair between Althea and Boyce, the merest foolish
flirtation, even, do you think it would have passed unnoticed?
You, Edith, Betty--I myself--would have cast an uneasy eye. When
we were looking about, some months ago, at the time of your
sister-in-law's visit, for a possible man, the thought of Leonard
Boyce never entered our heads. The only man you could rush at was
young Randall Holmes, and I laughed you out of the idea. Just
throw your mind back, Anthony, and try to recall any suspicious
incident. You can't."

I paused rhetorically, expecting a reply. None came. He just sat
looking at me in a dead way. I continued my special pleading; and
the more I said, the more was I baffled by his dead stare and the
more unconvincing platitudes did I find myself uttering. Some
people may be able to speak vividly to a deaf and dumb creature.
On this occasion I tried hard to do so, and failed. After a while
my words dribbled out with difficulty and eventually ceased. At
last he spoke, in the dull, toneless way of a dead man--presuming
that the dead could speak:

"You may talk till you're black in the face, but you know as well
as I do that the man told the truth--or practically the truth.
What he said he saw, he saw. What motives have been at the back of
his miserable mind, I don't know. You say I can't recall
suspicious incidents. I can. I'll tell you one. I came across them
once--about a month before the thing happened--among the
greenhouses. I think we were having one of our tennis parties. I
heard her using angry words, and when I appeared her face was
flushed and there were tears in her eyes. She was taken aback for
a second and then she rushed up to me. 'I think he's perfectly
horrid. He says that Jingo--' pointing to the dog; you remember
Jingo the Sealingham--she was devoted to him--he died last year--
'He says that Jingo is a mongrel--a throw back.' Boyce said he
was only teasing her and made pretty apologies. I left it at that.
Hit a dog or a horse belonging to Althea, and you hit Althea. That
was her way. The incident went out of my mind till this morning.
Other incidents, too. One thinks pretty quick at times. Again,
this scoundrel hit me on the raw. Boyce never wrote to us. Sent us
through his mother a conventional word of condolence. Edith and I
were hurt. That was one of the things that made me speak so
angrily of him when he wouldn't come and dine with us."

Once more I pleaded. "Your Sealingham incident doesn't impress me.
Why not take it at its face value? As for the letter of
condolence, that may have twenty explanations."

He passed his hand over his cropped iron-grey head. "What are you
driving at, Duncan? You know as well as I do--you know more than I
do. I saw it in your face ever since that man opened his mouth."

"If you're so sure of everything," said I foolishly, relaxing grip
on my self-control, "why did you hound him out of the place for a
liar?"

He leaped to his feet and spread himself into a fighting attitude,
for all the world like a half-dead bantam cock springing into a
new lease of combative life.

"Do you think I'd let a dunghill beast like that crow over me? Do
you think I'd let him imagine for a minute that anything he said
could influence me in my public duty? By God, sir, what kind of a
worm do you think I am?"

His sudden fury disconcerted me. All this time I had been
wondering what kind of catastrophe was going to happen during the
next few hours. I am afraid I haven't made clear to you the
ghastly racket in my brain. There was the town all beflagged,
everyone making holiday, all the pomp and circumstance at our
disposal awaiting the signal to be displayed. There was the blind
conquering hero almost on his way to local apotheosis. And here
were Sir Anthony and I with the revelation of the man Gedge. It
was a fantastic, baffling situation. I had been haunted by the
dread of discussing it. So in reply to his outburst I simply said:

"What are you going to do?"

He drew himself up, with his obstinate chin in the air, and looked
at me straight.

"If God gives me strength, I am going to do what lies before me."

At this moment Lady Fenimore came in.

"Mr. Winterbotham would like to speak to you a minute, Anthony.
It's something about the school children."

"All right, my dear. I'll go to him at once," said Sir Anthony.
"You'll stay and lunch with us, Duncan?"

I declined on the plea that I should have to nurse myself for a
strenuous day. Sir Anthony might play the Roman father, but it was
beyond my power to play the Roman father's guest.





CHAPTER XX


How he passed through the ordeal I don't know. If ever a man stood
captain of his soul, it was Anthony Fenimore that day. And his
soul was steel-armoured. Perhaps, if proof had come to him from an
untainted source, it might have modified his attitude. I cannot
tell. Without doubt the knavery of Gedge set aflame his
indignation--or rather the fierce pride of the great old Tory
gentleman. He would have walked through hell-fire sooner than
yielded an inch to Gedge. So much would scornful defiance have
done. But behind all this--and I am as certain of it as I am
certain that one day I shall die--burned even fiercer, steadier,
and clearer the unquenchable fire of patriotic duty. He was
dealing not with a man who had sinned terribly towards him, but
with a man who had offered his life over and over again to his
country, a man who had given to his country the sight of his eyes,
a man on whose breast the King himself had pinned the supreme
badge of honour in his gift. He was dealing, not with a private
individual, but with a national hero. In his small official
capacity as Mayor of Wellingsford, he was but the mouthpiece of a
national sentiment. And more than that. This ceremony was an
appeal to the unimaginative, the sluggish, the faint-hearted. In
its little way--and please remember that all tremendous
enthusiasms are fit by these little fires--it was a proclamation
of the undying glory of England. It was impersonal, it was
national, it was Imperial. In its little way it was of vast, far-
reaching importance.

I want you to remember these things in order that you should
understand the mental processes, or soul processes, or whatever
you like, of Sir Anthony Fenimore. Picture him. The most unheroic
little man you can imagine. Clean-shaven, bullet-headed, close-
cropped, his face ruddy and wrinkled like a withered apple, his
eyes a misty blue, his big nose marked like a network of veins,
his hands glazed and reddened, like his face, by wind and weather;
standing, even under his mayoral robes, like a jockey. Of course
he had the undefinable air of breeding; no one could have mistaken
his class. But he was an undistinguished, very ordinary looking
little man; and indeed he had done nothing for the past half
century to distinguish himself above his fellows. There are
thousands of his type, masters of English country houses. And of
all the thousands, every one brought up against the stern issues
of life would have acted like Anthony Fenimore. I say "would have
acted," but anyone who has lived in England during the war knows
that they have so acted. These incarnations of the commonplace,
the object of the disdain, before the war, of the self-styled
"intellectuals"--if the war sweeps the insufferable term into
oblivion it will have done some good--these honest unassuming
gentlemen have responded heroically to the great appeal; and when
the intellectuals have thought of their intellects or their skins,
they have thought only of their duty. And it was only the heroical
sense of duty that sustained Sir Anthony Fenimore that day.

I did not see the reception at the Railway Station or join the
triumphal procession; but went early to the Town Hall and took my
seat on the platform. I glibly say "took my seat." A wheel-chair,
sent there previously, was hoisted, with me inside, on to the
platform by Marigold and a porter. After all these years, I still
hate to be publicly paraded, like a grizzled baby, in Marigold's
arms. For convenience' sake I was posted at the front left-hand
corner. The hall soon filled. The first three rows of seats were
reserved for the recipients of the municipality's special
invitation; the remainder were occupied by the successful
applicants for tickets. From my almost solitary perch I watched
the fluttering and excited crowd. The town band in the organ
gallery at the further end discoursed martial music. From the main
door beneath them ran the central gangway to the platform. I
recognised many friends. In the front row with her two aunts sat
Betty, very demure in her widow's hat relieved by its little white
band of frilly stuff beneath the brim. She looked unusually pale.
I could not help watching her intently and trying to divine how
much she knew of the story of Boyce and Althea. She caught my eye,
nodded, and smiled wanly.

My situation was uncanny. In this crowded assemblage in front of
me, whispering, talking, laughing beneath the blare of the band,
not one, save Betty, had a suspicion of the tragedy. At times they
seemed to melt into a shadow-mass of dreamland .... Time crawled
on very slowly. Anxious forebodings oppressed me. Had Sir
Anthony's valiancy stood the test? Had he been able to shake hands
with his daughter's betrayer? Had he broken down during the drive
side by side with him, amid the hooraying of the townsfolk? And
Gedge? Had he found some madman's means of proclaiming the scandal
aloud? Every nerve in my body was strained. Marigold, in his
uniform and medals and patch and grey service cap plugged over his
black wig, stood sentry by the side of the platform next my chair.
All of a sudden he pulled out of his side pocket a phial of red
liqueur in a medicine glass. He poured out the dose and handed it
to me. turned on him wrathfully.

"What the dickens is that?"

"Dr. Cliffe's orders, sir."

"When did he order it?"

"When I told him what you looked like after interviewing Mister
Daniel Gedge. And he said, if you was to look like that again I
was to give you this. So I'm giving it to you, sir."

There was no arguing with Marigold in front of a thousand people.
I swallowed the stuff quickly. He put the phial and glass back in
his pocket and resumed his wooden sentry attitude by my chair. I
must own to feeling better for the draught. But, thought I, if the
strain of the situation is so great for me, what must it be for
Sir Anthony?

Presently the muffled sounds of outside cheering penetrated the
hall. The band stopped abruptly, to begin again with "See the
Conquering Hero Comes" when the civic procession appeared through
the great doors. There was little Sir Anthony in his robes, grave
and imposing, and beside him Mrs. Boyce, flushed, bright-eyed, and
tearful. Then came Lady Fenimore with Boyce, black-spectacled,
soldierly, bull-necked, his little bronze cross conspicuous among
the medals on his breast, his elbow gripped by a weatherbeaten
young soldier, one of his captains, as I learned afterwards, home
on leave, who had claimed the privilege of guiding his blind
footsteps. And behind came the Aldermen and the Councillors, and
the General and his staff, and the Lord Lieutenant and Lady
Laleham and the other members of the Reception Committee. The
cheering drowned the strains of the "Conquering Hero." Places were
taken on the platform. To the right of the Mayor sat Boyce, to the
left his mother. On the table in front were set scrolls and
caskets. You see, we had arranged that Mrs. Boyce should have an
address and a casket all to herself. The gallery soon was
picturesquely filled with the nurses, and the fire-brigade,
bright-helmeted, was massed in the doorway.

God gave the steel-hearted little man strength to go through the
ordeal. He delivered his carefully prepared oration in a voice
that never faltered. The passages referring to Boyce's blindness
he spoke with an accent of amazing sincerity. When he had ended
the responsive audience applauded tumultuously. From my seat by
the edge of the platform I watched Betty. Two red spots burned in
her cheeks. The addresses were read, the caskets presented. Boyce
remained standing, about to respond. He still held the casket in
both hands. His FIDUS ACHATES, guessing his difficulty, sprang up,
took it from him, and laid it on the table. Boyce turned to him
with his charming smile and said: "Thanks, old man." Again the
tumult broke out. Men cheered and women wept and waved wet
handkerchiefs. And he stood smiling at his unseen audience. When
he spoke, his deep, beautifully modulated voice held everyone
under its spell, and he spoke modestly and gaily like a brave
gentleman. I bent forward, as far as I was able, and scanned his
face. Never once, during the whole ceremony, did the tell-tale
twitch appear at the corners of his lips. He stood there the
incarnation of the modern knights sans fear and sans reproach.

I cannot tell which of the two, he or Sir Anthony, the more moved
my wondering admiration. Each exhibited a glorious defiance.

You may say that Boyce, receiving in his debonair fashion the
encomiums of the man whom he had wronged, was merely exhibiting
the familiar callousness of the criminal. If you do, I throw up my
brief. I shall have failed utterly to accomplish my object in
writing this book. I want no tears of sensibility shed over Boyce.
I want you to judge him by the evidence that I am trying to put
before you. If you judge him as a criminal, it is my poor
presentation of the evidence that is at fault. I claim for Boyce a
certain splendour of character, for all his grievous sins, a
splendour which no criminal in the world's history has ever
achieved. I beg you therefore to suspend your judgment, until I
have finished, as far as my poor powers allow, my unravelling of
his tangled skein. And pray remember too that I have sought all
through to present you with the facts PARI PASSU with my knowledge
of them. I have tried to tell the story through myself. I could
think of no other way of creating an essential verisimilitude.
Yet, even now, writing in the light of full knowledge, I cannot
admit that, when Boyce in that Town Hall faced the world--for, in
the deep tragic sense Wellingsford was his world--anyone knowing
as much as I did would have been justified in calling his
demeanour criminal callousness.

I say that he exhibited a glorious defiance. He defied the
concrete Gedge. He defied the more abstract, but none the less
real, tormenting Furies. He defied remorse. In accepting Sir
Anthony's praise he defied the craven in his own soul.

After a speech or two more, to which I did not listen, the
proceedings in the Town Hall ended. I drew a breath of relief. No
breakdown by Sir Anthony, no scandalous interruption by Gedge, had
marred the impressive ceremony. The band in the gallery played
"God Save the King." The crowd in the body of the hall, who had
stood for the anthem, sat down again, evidently waiting for Boyce
and the notables to pass out. The assemblage on the platform broke
up. Several members, among them the General, who paused to shake
hands with Boyce and his mother, left the hall by the private side
door. The Lord Lieutenant and Lady Laleham followed him soon
afterwards. Then the less magnificent crowded round Boyce, each
eager for a personal exchange of words with the hero. Sir Anthony
remained at his post, keeping on the outskirts of the throng,
bidding formal adieux to those who went away. Presently I saw that
Boyce was asking for me, for someone pointed me out to his officer
attendant, who led him down the steps of the platform and round
the edge to my seat.

"Well, it has gone off all right," said he. "Let me introduce
Captain Winslow, more than ever my right-hand man--Major
Meredyth."

We exchanged bows.

"The old mother's as pleased as Punch. She didn't know she was
going to get a little box of her own. I should like to have seen
her face. I did hear her give one of her little squeals. Did you?"

"No," said I, "but I saw her face. It was that of a saint in an
unexpected beatitude."

He laughed. "Dear old mother," said he. "She has deserved a show."
He turned away unconsciously, and, thinking to address me,
addressed the first row of spectators. "I suppose there's a lot of
folks here that I know."

By chance he seemed to be looking through his black glasses
straight at Betty a few feet away. She rose impulsively and,
before all Wellingsford, went up to him with hand outstretched.

"There's one at any rate, Colonel Boyce. I'm Betty Connor--"

"No need to tell me that," said he, bowing.

Winslow, at his elbow, most scrupulous of prompters, whispered:

"She wants to shake hands with you."

So their hands met. He kept hers an appreciable second or two in
his grasp.

"I hope you will accept my congratulations," said Betty.

"I have already accepted them, very gratefully. My mother conveyed
them to me. She was deeply touched by your letter. And may I, too,
say how deeply touched I am by your coming here?"

Betty looked swiftly round and her cheeks flushed, for there were
many of us within earshot. She laughed off her embarrassment.

"You have developed from a man into a Wellingsford Institution,
and I had to come and see you inaugurated. My aunts, too, are
here." She beckoned to them. "They are shyer than I am."

The elderly ladies came forward and spoke their pleasant words of
congratulation. Mrs. Holmes and others, encouraged, followed their
example. Mrs. Boyce suddenly swooped from the platform into the
middle of the group and kissed Betty, who emerged from the excited
lady's embrace blushing furiously. She shook hands with Betty's
aunts and thanked them for their presence; and in the old lady's
mind the reconciliation of the two houses was complete. Then, with
cheeks of a more delicate natural pink than any living
valetudinarian of her age could boast of, and with glistening
eyes, she made her way to me, and reaching up and drawing me down,
kissed me, too.

While all this was going on, the body of the hall began to empty.
The programme had arranged for nothing more by way of ceremonial
to take place. But a public gathering always hopes for something
unexpected, and, when it does not happen, takes its disappointment
philosophically. I think Betty's action must have shown them that
the rest of the proceedings were to be purely private and
informal.

The platform also gradually thinned, until at last, looking round,
I saw that only Sir Anthony and Lady Fenimore and Winterbotham,
the Town Clerk, remained. Then Lady Fenimore joined us. We were
about a score, myself perched on the edge and corner of the
platform, the rest standing on the floor of the hall in a sector
round me, Marigold, of course, in the middle of them by my side,
like an ill-graven image. As soon as she could Lady Fenimore came
up to me.

"Don't you think it splendid of Betty Connor to bury the hatchet
so publicly?" she whispered.

"The war," said I, "is a solvent of many human complications."

"It is indeed." Then she added: "I am going to have a little
dinner party some time soon for the Boyces. I sounded him to-day
and he practically promised. I'll ask the Lalehams. Of course
you'll come. Now that things have shown themselves so topsy-turvy
I've been wondering whether I should ask Betty."

"Does Anthony know of this dinner party?" I enquired.

"What does it matter whether he does or not?" she laughed. "Dinner
parties come within my province and I'm mistress of it."

Of course Boyce had half promised. What else could he do without
discourtesy? But the banquet which, in her unsuspecting innocence
she proposed, seemed to me a horrible meal. Doubtless it would
seem so to Sir Anthony. At the moment I did not know whether he
intended to tell Gedge's story to his wife. At any rate, hitherto,
he had not done so.

"All the same, my dear Edith," I replied, "Anthony may have a word
to say. I happen to know he has no particular personal friendship
for Boyce, who, if you'll forgive my saying so, has treated you
rather cavalierly for the past two years. Anthony's welcome to-day
was purely public and official. It had nothing to do with his
private feelings."

"But they have changed. He was referring to the matter only this
morning at breakfast and suggesting things we could do to lighten
the poor man's affliction."

"I don't think a dinner party would lighten it," I said. "And if I
were you, I wouldn't suggest it to Anthony."

"That's rather mysterious." She looked at me shrewdly. "And
there's another mysterious thing. Anthony's like a yapping sphinx
over it. What were you two talking to Gedge about this morning?"
"Nothing particular."

"That's nonsense, Duncan. Gedge was making himself unpleasant. He
never does anything else."

"If you want to know," said I, with a convulsive effort of
invention, "we heard that he was preparing some sort of
demonstration, going to bring down some of his precious anti-war-
league people."

"He wouldn't have the pluck," she exclaimed.

"Anyhow," said I, "we thought we had better have him in and read
him the Riot--or rather the Defence of the Realm--Act. That's
all."

"Then why on earth couldn't Anthony tell me?"

"You ought to know the mixture of sugar and pepper in your
husband's nature better than I do, my dear Edith," I replied.

Her laugh reassured me. I had turned a difficult corner. No doubt
she would go to Sir Anthony with my explanation and either receive
his acquiescence or learn the real truth.

She was bidding me farewell when Sir Anthony came along the
platform to the chair. I glanced up, but I saw that he did not
wish to speak to me. He was looking grim and tired. He called down
to his wife:

"It's time to move, dear. The troops are still standing outside."

She bustled about giving the signal for departure, first running
to Boyce and taking him by the sleeve. I had not noticed that he
had withdrawn with Betty a few feet away from the little group.
They were interrupted in an animated conversation. At the sight I
felt a keen pang of repulsion. Those two ought not to talk
together as old friends. It outraged decencies. It was all very
well for Betty to play the magnanimous and patriotic Englishwoman.
By her first word of welcome she had fulfilled the part. But this
flushed, eager talk lay far beyond the scope of patriotic duty.
How could they thus converse over the body of the dead Althea?
With both of them was I indignant.

In my inmost heart I felt horribly and vulgarly jealous. I may as
well confess it. Deeply as I had sworn blood-brotherhood with
Boyce, regardless of the crimes he might or might not have
committed, I could not admit him into that inner brotherhood of
which Betty and I alone were members. And this is just a
roundabout, shame-faced way of saying that, at that moment, I
discovered that I was hopelessly, insanely in love with Betty. The
knowledge came to me in a great wave of dismay.

"You'll let me see you again, won't you?" he asked.

"If you like."

I don't think I heard the words, but I traced them on their lips.
They parted. Sir Anthony descended from the platform and gave his
arm to Mrs. Boyce. Lady Fenimore still clung to Boyce.
Winterbotham came next, bearing the two caskets, which had been
lying neglected on the table. The sparse company followed down the
empty hall. Marigold signalled to the porter and they hoisted down
my chair. Betty, who had lingered during the operation, walked by
my side. Being able now to propel myself, I dismissed Marigold to
a discreet position in the rear. Betty, her face still slightly
flushed, said:

"I'm waiting for congratulations which seem to be about as
overwhelming as snow in August. Don't you think I've been
extraordinarily good?"

"Do you feel good?"

"More than good," she laughed. "Christianlike. Aren't we told in
the New Testament to forgive our enemies?"

"'And love those that despitefully use us?'" I misquoted
maliciously. A sudden gust of anger often causes us to do worse
things than trifle with the text of the Sermon on the Mount.

She turned on me quickly, as though stung. "Why not? Isn't the
sight of him maimed like that enough to melt the heart of a
stone?"

I replied soberly enough. "It is indeed."

I had already betrayed my foolish jealousy. Further altercation
could only result in my betraying Boyce. I did not feel very
happy. Conscious of having spoken to me with unwonted sharpness,
she sought to make amends by laying her hand on my shoulder.

"I think, dear," she said, "we're all on rather an emotional edge
to-day."

We reached the front door of the hall. At the top of the shallow
flight of broad stairs the little group that had preceded us stood
behind Boyce, who was receiving the cheers of the troops--soldiers
and volunteers and the Godbury School Officers' Training Corps--
drawn up in the Market Square. When the cheers died away the crowd
raised cries for a speech.

Again Boyce spoke.

"The reception you have given my mother and myself," he said, "we
refuse to take personally. It is a reception given to the
soldiers, and the mothers and wives of soldiers, of the Empire, of
whom we just happen to be the lucky representatives. Whole
regiments, to say nothing of whole armies, can't all, every jack
man, receive Victoria Crosses. But every regiment very jealously
counts up its honours. You'll hear men say: 'Our regiment has two
V.C.s, five D.S.O.s, and twenty Distinguished Conduct Medals.' and
the feeling is that all the honours are lumped together and shared
by everybody, from the Colonel to the drummer-boys. And each
individual is proud of his share because he knows that he deserves
it. And so it happens that those whom chance has set aside for
distinction, like the lucky winners in a sweepstake, are the most
embarrassed people you can imagine, because everybody is doing
everything that they did every day in the week. For instance, if I
began to tell you a thousandth part of the dare-devil deeds of my
friend here, Captain Winslow of my regiment, he would bolt like a
rabbit into the Town Hall and fall on his knees and pray for an
earthquake. And whether the earthquake came off or not, I'm sure
he would never speak to me again. And they're all like that. But
in honouring me you are honouring him, and you're honouring our
regiment, and you're honouring the army. And in honouring Mrs.
Boyce, you are honouring that wonderful womanhood of the Empire
that is standing heroically behind their men in the hell upon
God's good earth which is known as the front."

It was a soldierlike little speech, delivered with the man's
gallant charm. Young Winslow gripped his arm affectionately and I
heard him say--"You are a brute, sir, dragging me into it." The
little party descended the steps of the Town Hall. The words of
command rang out. The Parade stood at the salute, which Boyce
acknowledged, guided by Winslow and his mother he reached his car,
to which he was attended by the Mayor and Mayoress. After formal
leave-taking the Boyces and Winslow drove off amid the plaudits of
the crowd. Then Sir Anthony and Lady Fenimore. Then Betty and her
aunts. Last of all, while the troops were preparing to march away
and the crowd was dispersing and all the excitement was over,
Marigold picked me out of my chair and carried me down to my
little grey two-seater.





CHAPTER XXI


Of course, after this (in the words of my young friends) I crocked
up. The confounded shell that had played the fool with my legs had
also done something silly to my heart. Hence these collapses after
physical and emotional strain. I had to stay in bed for some days.
Cliffe told me that as soon as I was fit to travel I must go to
Bournemouth, where it would be warm. I told Cliffe to go to a
place where it would be warmer. As neither of us would obey the
other, we remained where we were.

Cliffe informed me that Lady Fenimore had called him in to see Sir
Anthony, whom she described as being on the obstinate edge of a
nervous breakdown. I was sorry to hear it.

"I suppose you've tried to send him, too, to Bournemouth?"

"I haven't," Cliffe replied gravely. "He has got something on his
mind. I'm sure of it. So is his wife. What's the good of sending
him away?"

"What do you think is on his mind?" I asked.

"How do I know? His wife thinks it must be something to do with
Boyce's reception. He went home dead-beat, is very irritable, off
his food, can't sleep, and swears cantankerously that there's
nothing the matter with him,--the usual symptoms. Can you throw
any light on it?"

"Certainly not," I replied rather sharply.

Cliffe said "Umph!" in his exasperating professional way and
proceeded to feel my pulse.

"I don't quite see how Friday's mild exertion could account for
YOUR breakdown, my friend," he remarked.

"I'm so glad you confess, at last, not to seeing everything," said
I.

I was fearing this physical reaction in Sir Anthony. It was only
the self-assertion of Nature. He had gone splendidly through his
ordeal, having braced himself up for it. He had not braced himself
up, however, sufficiently to go through the other and far longer
ordeal of hiding his secret from his wife. So of course he went to
pieces.

After Cliffe had left me, with his desire for information
unsatisfied, I rang up Wellings Park. It was the Sunday morning
after the reception. To my surprise, Sir Anthony answered me; for
he was an old-fashioned country churchgoer and plague, pestilence,
famine, battle, murder and sudden death had never been known to
keep him out of his accustomed pew on Sunday morning. Edith, he
informed me, had gone to church; he himself, being as nervous as a
cat, had funked it; he was afraid lest he might get up in the
middle of the sermon and curse the Vicar.

"If that's so," said I, "come round here and talk sense. I've
something important to say to you."

He agreed and shortly afterwards he arrived. I was shocked to see
him. His ruddy face had yellowed and the firm flesh had loosened
and sagged. I had never noticed that his stubbly hair was so grey.
He could scarcely sit still on the chair by my bedside.

I told him of Cliffe's suspicions. We were a pair of conspirators
with unavowable things on our minds which were driving us to
nervous catastrophe. Edith, said I, was more suspicious even than
Cliffe. I also told him of our talk about the projected dinner
party.

"That," he declared, "would drive me stark, staring mad."

"So will continuing to hide the truth from Edith," said I. "How do
you suppose you can carry on like this?"

He grew angry. How could he tell Edith? How could he make her
understand his reason for welcoming Boyce? How could he prevent
her from blazing the truth abroad and crying aloud for vengeance?
What kind of a fool's counsel was I giving him?

I let him talk, until, tired with reiteration, he had nothing more
to say. Then I made him listen to me while I expounded that which
was familiar to his obstinate mind--namely, the heroic qualities
of his own wife.

"It comes to this," said I, by way of peroration, "that you're
afraid of Edith letting you down, and you ought to be ashamed of
yourself."

At that he flared out again. How dared I, he asked, eating his
words, suggest that he did not trust the most splendid woman God
had ever made? Didn't I see that he was only trying to shield her
from knowledge that might kill her? I retorted by pointing out
that worry over his insane behaviour--please remember that above
our deep unchangeable mutual affection, a violent surface quarrel
was raging--would more surely and swiftly kill her than unhappy
knowledge. Her quick brain--had already connected Gedge, Boyce,
and his present condition as the main factors of some strange
problem. "Her quick brain!" I cried. "A half idiot child would
have put things together."

Presently he collapsed, sitting hopelessly, nervelessly in his
chair. At last he lifted a piteously humble face.

"What would you suggest my doing, Duncan?"

There seemed to me to be only one thing he could do in order to
preserve, if not his reason, at any rate his moral equilibrium in
the position which he had contrived for himself. To tell him this
had been my object in seeking the interview, and the blessed
opportunity only came after an hour's hard wrangle--in current
metaphor after an hour's artillery preparation for attack. He
looked so battered, poor old Anthony, that I felt almost ashamed
of the success of my bombardment.

"It's not a question of suggesting," said I. "It's a question of
things that have to be done. You need a holiday. You've been
working here at high pressure for nearly a couple of years. Go
away. Put yourself in the hands of Cliffe, and go to Bournemouth,
or Biarritz, or Bahia, or any beastly place you can fix up with
him to go to. Go frankly For three or four months. Go to-morrow.
As soon as you're well out of the place, tell Edith the whole
story. Then you can take counsel and comfort together."

He was in the state of mind to be impressed by my argument. I
followed up my advantage. I undertook to send a ruthless flaming
angel of a Cliffe to pronounce the inexorable decree of exile.
After a few faint-hearted objections he acquiesced in the scheme.
I fancy he revolted against even this apparent surrender to Gedge,
although he was too proud to confess it. No man likes running
away. Sir Anthony also regarded as pusillanimous the proposal to
leave his wife in ignorance until he had led her into the trap of
holiday. Why not put her into his confidence before they started?

"That," said I, "is a delicate question which only you yourself
can decide. By following my plan you get away at once, which is
the most important thing. Once comfortably away, you can choose
the opportune moment."

"There's something in that," he replied; and, after thanking me
for my advice, he left me.

I do not defend my plan. I admit it was Machiavellian. My one
desire was to remove these two dear people from Wellingsford for a
season. Just think of the horrible impossibility of their
maintaining social relations with the Boyces ....

By publicly honouring Boyce, Sir Anthony had tied his own hands.
It was a pledge to Boyce, although the latter did not know it, of
condonation. Whatever stories Gedge might spread abroad, whatever
proofs he might display, Sir Anthony could take no action. But to
carry on a semblance of friendship with the man responsible for
his daughter's death--for the two of them, mind you, since Lady
Fenimore would sooner or later learn everything--was, as I say,
horribly impossible.

Let them go, then, on their nominal holiday, during which the air
might clear. Boyce might take his mother away from Wellingsford.
She would do far more than uproot herself from her home in order
to gratify a wish of her adored and blinded son. He would employ
his time of darkness in learning to be brave, he had told me. It
took some courage to face the associations of dreadful memories
unflinchingly, for his mother's sake. Should he learn, however,
that the Fenimores had an inkling of the truth, he would recognise
his presence in the place to be an outrage. And such inkling--who
would give it him? Perhaps I, myself. The Boyces would go--the
Fenimores could return. Anything, anything rather than that the
Fenimores and the Boyces should continue to dwell in the same
little town.

And there was Betty--with all the inexplicable feminine whirring
inside her--socially reconciled with Boyce. Where the deuce was
this reconciliation going to lead? I have told you how my lunatic
love for Betty had stood revealed to me. Had she chosen to love
and marry any ordinary gallant gentleman, God knows I should not
have had a word to say. The love that such as I can give a woman
can find its only true expression in desiring and contriving her
happiness. But that she should sway back to Leonard Boyce--no, no.
I could not bear it. All the shuddering pictures of him rose up
before me, the last, that of him standing by the lock gates and
suddenly running like a frightened rabbit, with his jaunty soft
felt hat squashed shapelessly over his ears.

Gedge could not have invented that abominable touch of the
squashed hat.

I have said that possibly I myself might give Boyce an inkling of
the truth. Thinking over the matter in my restless bed, I shrank
from doing so. Should I not be disingenuously serving my own ends?
Betty stepped in, whom I wanted for myself. Neither could I go to
Boyce and challenge him for a villain and summon him to quit the
town and leave those dear to me at peace. I could not condemn him.
I had unshaken faith in the man's noble qualities. That he drowned
Althea Fenimore I did not, could not, believe. After all that had
passed between us, I felt my loyalty to him irrevocably pledged.
More than ever was I enmeshed in the net of the man's destiny.

As yet, however, I could not bear to see him. I could not bear to
see Betty, who called now and then. For the first time in my life
I took refuge in my invalidity, whereby I earned the commendation
of Cliffe. Betty sent me flowers. Mrs. Boyce sent me grapes and an
infallible prescription for heart attacks which, owing to the
hopeless mess she had made in trying to copy the wriggles
indicating the quantities of the various drugs, was of no
practical use. Phyllis Gedge sent me a few bunches of violets with
a shy little note. Lady Fenimore wrote me an affectionate letter
bidding me farewell. They were going to Bude in Cornwall, Anthony
having put himself under Dr. Cliffe's orders like a wonderful
lamb. When she came back, she hoped that her two sick men would be
restored to health and able to look more favourably upon her
projected dinner party. Marigold also brought into my bedroom a
precious old Waterford claret jug which I had loved and secretly
coveted for twenty years, with a card attached bearing the
inscription "With love from Anthony." That was his dumb, British
way of informing me that he was taking my advice.

When my self-respect would allow me no longer to remain in bed, I
got up; but I still shrank from publishing the news of my
recovery, in which reluctance I met with the hearty encouragement
both of Cliffe and Marigold. The doctor then informed me that my
attack of illness had been very much more serious than I realised,
and that unless I made up my mind to lead the most unruffled of
cabbage-like existences, he would not answer for what might
befall me. If he could have his way, he would carry me off and put
me into solitary confinement for a couple of months on a sunny
island, where I should hold no communication with the outside
world. Marigold heard this announcement with smug satisfaction.
Nothing would please him more than to play gaoler over me.

At last, one morning, I said to him: "I'm not going to submit to
tyranny any longer. I resume my normal life. I'm at home to
anybody who calls. I'm at home to the devil himself."

"Very good, sir," said Marigold.

An hour or two afterwards the door was thrown open and there stood
on the threshold the most amazing apparition that ever sought
admittance into a gentleman's library; an apparition, however,
very familiar during these days to English eyes. From the
shapeless Tam-o'-Shanter to the huge boots it was caked in mud.
Over a filthy sheepskin were slung all kinds of paraphernalia,
covered with dirty canvas which made it look a thing of mighty
bulges among which a rifle was poked away. It wore a kilt covered
by a khaki apron. It also had a dirty and unshaven face. A muddy
warrior fresh from the trenches, of course. But what was he doing
here?

"I see, sir, you don't recognise me," he said with a smile.

"Good Lord!" I cried, with a start, "it's Randall."

"Yes, sir. May I come in?"

"Come in? What infernal nonsense are you talking?" I held out my
hand, and, after greeting him, made him sit down.

"Now," said I, "what the deuce are you doing in that kit?"

"That's what I've been asking myself for the last ten months.
Anyhow I shan't wear it much longer."

"How's that?"

"Commission, sir," he answered.

"Oh!" said I.

His entrance had been so abrupt and unexpected that I hardly knew
as yet what to make of him. Speculation as to his doings had led
me to imagine him engaged in some elegant fancy occupation on the
fringe of the army, if indeed he were serving his country so
creditably. I found it hard to reconcile my conception of Master
Randall Holmes with this businesslike Tommy who called me "Sir"
every minute.

"I'll tell you about it, sir, if you're interested. But first--how
is my mother?"

"Your mother? You haven't seen her yet?"

Here, at least, was a bit of the old casual Randall. He shook his
head.

"I've only just this minute arrived. Left the trenches yesterday.
Walked from the station. Not a soul recognised me. I thought I had
better come here first and report, just as I was, and not wait
until I had washed and shaved and put on Christian clothes again.
"He looked at me and grinned. "Seeing is believing."

"Your mother is quite well," said I. "Haven't you given her any
warning of your arrival?"

"Oh, no!" he answered. "I didn't want any brass bands. Besides, as
I say, I wanted to see you first. Then to look in at the hospital.
I suppose Phyllis Gedge is still at the hospital?"

"She is. But I think, my dear chap, your mother has the first call
on you."

"She wouldn't enjoy my present abominable appearance as much as
Phyllis," he replied, coolly. "You see, Phyllis is responsible for
it. I told you she refused to marry me, didn't I, sir? After that,
she called me a coward. I had to show her that I wasn't one. It
was an awful nuisance, I admit, for I had intended to do something
quite different. Oh! not Gedging or anything of that sort--but--"
he dived beneath his sheepskin and brought out a tattered letter
case and from a mass of greasy documents (shades of superior
Oxford!) selected a dirty, ragged bit of newspaper--"but," said
he, handing me the fragment, "I think I've succeeded. I don't
suppose this caught your eye, but if you look closely into it,
you'll see that 11003 Private R. Holmes, 1st Gordon Highlanders, a
couple of months ago was awarded the Distinguished Conduct Medal.
I may be any kind of a fool or knave she likes to call me, but she
can't call me a coward."

I congratulated him with all my heart, which, after the first
shock, was warming towards him rapidly.

"But why," I asked, still somewhat bewildered, "didn't you apply
for a commission? A year ago you could have got one easily. Why
enlist? And the 1st Gordons--that's the regular army."

He laughed and asked permission to help himself to a cigarette.
"By George, that's good," he exclaimed after a few puffs. "That's
good after months of Woodbines. I found I could stand everything
except Tommy's cigarettes. Everything about me has got as hard as
nails, except my palate for tobacco .... Why didn't I apply for a
commission? Any fool could get a commission. It's different now.
Men are picked and must have seen active service, and then they're
sent off to cadet training corps. But last year I could have got
one easily. And I might have been kicking my heels about England
now."

"Yet, at the sight of a Sam Browne belt, Phyllis would have surely
recanted," said I.

"I didn't want the girl I intended to marry and pass my life with
to have her head turned by such trappings as a Sam Browne belt.
She has had to be taught that she is going to marry a man. I'm not
such a fool as you may have thought me, Major," he said, forgetful
of his humble rank. "Suppose I had got a commission and married
her. Suppose I had been kept at home and never gone out and never
seen a shot fired, like heaps of other fellows, or suppose I had
taken the line I had marked out--do you think we should have been
assured a happy life? Not a bit of it. We might have been happy
for twenty years. And then--women are women and can't help
themselves--the old word--by George, sir, she spat it at me from
a festering sore in her very soul--the old word would have rankled
all the time, and some stupid quarrel having arisen, she would
have spat it at me again. I wasn't taking any chances of that
kind."

"My dear boy," said I, subridently, "you seem to be very wise."
And he did. So far as I knew anything about humans, male and
female, his proposition was incontrovertible. "But where did you
gather your wisdom?"

"I suppose," he replied seriously, "that my mind is not entirely
unaffected by a very expensive education."

I looked at the extraordinary figure in sheepskin, bundles and
mud, and laughed out loud. The hands of Esau and the voice of
Jacob. The garb of Thomas Atkins and the voice of Balliol. Still,
as I say, the fellow was perfectly right. His highly trained
intelligence had led him to an exact conclusion. The festering
sore demanded drastic treatment,--the surgeon's knife. As we
talked I saw how coldly his brain had worked. And side by side
with that working I saw, to my amusement, the insistent claims of
his vanity. The quickest way to the front, where alone he could
re-establish his impugned honour was by enlistment in the regular
army. For the first time in his life he took a grip on essentials.
He knew that by going straight into the heart of the old army his
brains, provided they remained in his head, would enable him to
accomplish his purpose. As for his choice of regiment, there his
vanity guided. You may remember that after his disappearance we
first heard of him at Aberdeen. Now Aberdeen is the depot of the
Gordon Highlanders.

"What on earth made you go there?" I asked.

"I wanted to get among a crowd where I wasn't known, and wasn't
ever likely to be known," he replied. "And my instinct was right.
I was among farmers from Skye and butchers from Inverness and
drunken scallywags from the slums of Aberdeen, and a leaven of old
soldiers from all over Scotland. I had no idea that such people
existed. At first I thought I shouldn't be able to stick it. They
gave me a bad time for being an Englishman. But soon, I think,
they rather liked me. I set my brains to work and made 'em like
me. I knew there was everything to learn about these fellows and I
went scientifically to work to learn it. And, by Heaven, sir, when
once they accepted me, I found I had never been in such splendid
company in my life."

"My dear boy," I cried in a burst of enthusiasm, "have you had
breakfast?"

"Of course I have. At the Union Jack Club--the Tommies' place the
other side of the river--bacon and eggs and sausages. I thought
I'd never stop eating."

"Have some more?"

He laughed. "Couldn't think of it."

"Then," said I, "get yourself a cigar." I pointed to a stack of
boxes. "You'll find the Corona--Coronas the best."

As I am not a millionaire I don't offer these Coronas to
everybody. I myself can only afford to smoke one or two a week.

When he had lit it he said: "I was led away from what I wanted to
tell you,--my going to Aberdeen and plunging into the obscurity of
a Scottish regiment. I was absolutely determined that none of my
friends, none of you good people, should know what an ass I had
made of myself. That's why I kept it from my mother. She would
have blabbed it all over the place."

"But, my good fellow," said I, "why the dickens shouldn't we have
known?"

"That I was making an ass of myself?"

"No, you young idiot!" I cried. "That you were making a man of
yourself."

"I preferred to wait," said he, coolly, "until I had a reasonable
certainty that I had achieved that consummation--or, rather,
something that might stand for it in the prejudiced eyes of my
dear friends. I knew that you all, ultimately, you and mother and
Phyllis, would judge by results. Well, here they are. I've lived
the life of a Tommy for ten months. I've been five in the thick of
it over there. I've refused stripes over and over again. I've got
my D.C.M. I've got my commission through the ranks, practically on
the field. And of the draft of two hundred who went out with me
only one other and myself remain."

"It's a splendid record, my boy," said I.

He rose. "Don't misunderstand me, Major. I'm not bragging. God
forbid. I'm only wanting to explain why I kept dark all the time,
and why I'm springing smugly and complacently on you now."

"I quite understand," said I.

"In that case," he laughed, "I can proceed on my rounds." But he
did not proceed. He lingered. "There's another matter I should
like to mention," he said. "In her last letter my mother told me
that the Mayor and Town Council were on the point of giving a
civic reception to Colonel Boyce. Has it taken place yet?"

"Yes," said I. "And did it go off all right?"

In spite of wisdom learned at Balliol and shell craters, he was
still an ingenuous youth.

"Gedge was perfectly quiet," I answered.

He started, as he had for months learned not to start, and into
his eyes sprang an alarm that was usually foreign to them.

"Gedge? How do you know anything about Gedge and Colonel Boyce?
Good Lord! He hasn't been spreading that poisonous stuff over the
town?"

"That's what you were afraid of when you asked about the
reception?"

"Of course," said he.

"And you wanted to have your mind clear on the point before
interviewing Phyllis."

"You're quite right, sir," he replied, a bit shamefacedly. "But if
he hasn't been spreading it, how do you know? And," he looked at
me sharply, "what do you know?"

"You gave your word of honour not to repeat what Gedge told you. I
think you may be absolved of your promise. Gedge came to Sir
Anthony and myself with a lying story about the death of Althea
Fenimore."

"Yes," said he. "That was it."

"Sit down for another minute or two," said I, "and let us compare
notes."

He obeyed. We compared notes. I found that in most essentials the
two stories were identical, although Gedge had been maudlin drunk
when he admitted Randall into his confidence.

"But in pitching you his yarn," cried Randall, "he left out the
blackmail. He bragged in his beastly way that Colonel Boyce was
worth a thousand a year to him. All he had to live upon now that
the blood-suckers had ruined his business. Then he began to weep
and slobber--he was a disgusting sight--and he said he would give
it all up and beg with his daughter in the streets as soon as he
had an opportunity of unmasking 'that shocking wicked fellow.'"

"What did you say then?" I asked.

"I told him if ever I heard of him spreading such infernal lies
abroad, I'd wring his neck."

"Very good, my boy," said I. "That's practically what Sir Anthony
told him."

"Sir Anthony doesn't believe there's any truth in it?"

"Sir Anthony," said I, boldly, "knows there's not a particle of
truth in it. The man's malignancy has taken the form of a fixed
idea. He's crack-brained. Between us we put the fear of God into
him, and I don't think he'll give any more trouble."

Randall got to his feet again. "I'm very much relieved to hear you
say so. I must confess I've been horribly uneasy about the whole
thing." He drew a deep breath. "Thank goodness I can go to
Phyllis, as you say, with a clear mind. The last time I saw her I
was half crazy."

He held out his hand, a dirty, knubbly, ragged-nailed hand--the
hand that was once so irritatingly manicured.

"Good-bye, Major. You won't shut the door on me now, will you?"

I wrung his hand hard and bade him not be silly, and, looking up
at him, said:

"What was the other thing quite different you were intending to do
before you, let us say, quarreled with Phyllis?"

He hesitated, his forehead knit in a little web of perplexity.

"Whatever it was," I continued, "let us have it. I'm your oldest
friend, a sort of father. Be frank with me and you won't regret
it. The splendid work you've done has wiped out everything."

"I'm afraid it has," said he ruefully. "Wiped it out clean." With
a hitch of the shoulders he settled his pack more comfortably.
"Well, I'll tell you, Major. I thought I had brains. I still think
I have. I was on the point of getting a job in the Secret Service
--Intelligence Department. I had the whole thing cut and dried--to
get at the ramifications of German espionage in socialistic and
so-called intellectual circles in neutral and other countries. It
would have been ticklish work, for I should have been carrying my
life in my hands. I could have done it well. I started out by
being a sort of 'intellectual' myself. All along I wanted to put
my brains at the service of my country. I took some time to hit
upon the real way. I hit upon it. I learned lots of things from
Gedge. If he weren't an arrant coward, he might be dangerous. He
would be taking German money long ago, but that he's frightened to
death of it." He laughed. "It never occurred to you, I suppose, a
year ago," he continued, "that I spent most of my days in London
working like a horse."

"But," I cried--I felt myself flushing purple--and, when I flush
purple, the unregenerate old soldier in me uses language of a
corresponding hue--"But," I cried--and in this language I asked
him why he had told me nothing about it.

"The essence of the Secret Service, sir," replied this maddening
young man, "is--well--secrecy."

"You had a billet offered to you, of the kind you describe?"

"The offer reached me, very much belated, one day when I was half
dead, after having performed some humiliating fatigue duty. I
think I had persisted in trying to scratch an itching back on
parade. Military discipline, I need not tell you, Major, doesn't
take into account the sensitiveness of a recruit's back. It flatly
denies such a phenomenon. Now I think I can defy anything in God's
quaint universe to make me itch. But that's by the way. I tore the
letter up and never answered it. You do these things, sir, when
the whole universe seems to be a stumbling-block and an offence.
Phyllis was the stumbling-block and the rest of the cosmos was the
other thing. That's why I have reason on my side when I say that,
all through Phyllis Gedge, I made an ass of myself."

He clutched his rude coat with both hands. "An ass in sheep's
clothing."

He drew himself up, saluted, and marched out.

He marched out, the young scoundrel, with all the honours of war.





CHAPTER XXII


So, in drawing a bow at a venture, I had hit the mark. You may
remember that I had rapped out the word "blackmail" at Gedge; now
Randall justified the charge. Boyce was worth a thousand a year to
him. The more I speculated on the danger that might arise from
Gedge, the easier I grew in my mind. Your blackmailer is a
notorious saver of his skin. Gedge had no desire to bring Boyce to
justice and thereby incriminate himself. His visit to Sir Anthony
was actuated by sheer malignity. Without doubt, he counted on his
story being believed. But he knew enough of the hated and envied
aristocracy to feel assured that Sir Anthony would not subject his
beloved dead to such ghastly disinterment as a public denunciation
of Boyce would necessitate. He desired to throw an asphyxiating
bomb into the midst of our private circle. He reckoned on the
Mayor taking some action that would stop the reception and thereby
put a public affront on Boyce. Sir Anthony's violent indignation
and perhaps my appearance of cold incredulity upset his
calculations. He went out of the room a defeated man, with the
secret load (as I knew now) of blackmail on his shoulders.

I snapped my fingers at Gedge. Randall seemed to do the same,
undesirable father-in-law IN PROSPECTU as he was. But that was
entirely Randall's affair. The stomach that he had for fighting
with Germans would stand him in good stead against Gedge,
especially as he had formed so contemptuous an estimate of the
latter's valour.

I emerged again into my little world. I saw most of my friends.
Phyllis lay in wait for me at the hospital, radiant and blushing,
ostensibly to congratulate me on recovery from my illness, really
(little baggage!) to hear from my lips a word or two in praise of
Randall. Apparently he had come, in his warrior garb, seen, and
conquered on the spot. I saw Mrs. Holmes, who, gladdened by the
Distinguished Conduct Medallist's return, had wiped from her
memory his abominably unfilial behaviour. I saw Betty and I saw
Boyce.

Now here I come to a point in this chronicle where I am faced by
an appalling difficulty. Hitherto I have striven to tell you no
more about myself and my motives and feelings than was demanded by
my purpose of unfolding to you the lives of others. Primarily I
wanted to explain Leonard Boyce. I could only do it by showing you
how he reacted on myself--myself being an unimportant and
uninteresting person. It was all very well when I could stand
aside and dispassionately analyse such reactions. The same with
regard to my dear Betty. But now if I adopted the same method of
telling you the story of Betty and the story of Boyce--the method
of reaction, so to speak--I should be merely whining into your
ears the dolorous tale of Duncan Meredyth, paralytic and idiot.

The deuce of it is that, for a long time, nothing particular or
definite happened. So how can I describe to you a very important
period in the lives of Betty and Boyce and me?

I had to resume my intimacy with Boyce. The blind and lonely man
craved it and claimed it. It would be an unmeaning pretence of
modesty to under-estimate the value to him of my friendship. He
was a man of intense feelings. Torture had closed his heart to the
troops of friends that so distinguished a soldier might have had.
He granted admittance but to three, his mother, Betty and--for
some unaccountable reason--myself. On us he concentrated all the
strength of his affection. Mind you, it was not a case of a maimed
creature clinging for support to those who cared for him. In his
intercourse with me, he never for a moment suggested that he was
seeking help or solace in his affliction. On the contrary, he
ruled it out of the conditions of social life. He was as brave as
you please. In his laughing scorn of blindness he was the bravest
man I have ever known. He learned the confidence of the blind with
marvellous facility. His path through darkness was a triumphant
march.

Sometimes, when he re-fought old battles and planned new ones,
forecast the strategy of the Great Advance, word-painted scenes
and places, drew character sketches of great leaders and quaint
men, I forgot the tragedy of Althea Fenimore. And when the memory
came swiftly back, I wondered whether, after all, Gedge's story
from first to last had not been a malevolent invention. The man
seemed so happy. Of course you will say it was my duty to give a
hint of Gedge's revelation. It was. To my shame, I shirked it. I
could not find it in my heart suddenly to dash into his happiness.
I awaited an opportunity, a change of mood in him, an allusion to
confidences of which I alone of human beings had been the
recipient.

Betty visited me as usual. We talked war and hospital and local
gossip for a while and then she seemed to take refuge at the
piano. We had one red-letter day, when a sailor cousin of hers,
fresh from the North Sea, came to luncheon and told us wonders of
the Navy which we had barely imagined and did not dare to hope
for. His tidings gave subject for many a talk.

I knew that she was seeing Boyce constantly. The former
acquaintance of the elders of the two houses flamed into sudden
friendship. From a remark artlessly let fall by Mrs. Boyce, I
gathered that the old ladies were deliberately contriving such
meetings. Boyce and Betty referred to each other rarely and
casually, but enough to show me that the old feud was at an end.
And of what save one thing could the end of a feud between lovers
be the beginning? What did she know? Knowing all, how could she be
drawn back under the man's fascination? The question maddened me.
I suffered terribly.

At last, one evening, I could bear it no longer. She was playing
Chopin. The music grated on me. I called out to her:

"Betty!"

She broke off and turned round, with a smile of surprise. Again
she was wearing the old black evening dress, in which I have told
you she looked so beautiful.

"No more music, dear. Come and talk to me."

She crossed the room with her free step and sat near my chair.

"What shall I talk about?" she laughed.

"Leonard Boyce."

The laughter left her face and she gave me a swift glance.

"Majy dear, I'd rather not," she said with a little air of
finality.

"I know that," said I. "I also know that in your eyes I am
committing an unwarrantable impertinence."

"Not at all," she replied politely. "You have the right to talk to
me for my good. It's impertinence in me not to wish to hear it."

"Betty dear," said I, "will you tell me what was the cause of your
estrangement?"

She stiffened. "No one has the right to ask me that."

"A man who loves you very, very dearly," said I, "will claim it.
Was the cause Althea Fenimore?"

She looked at me almost in frightened amazement.

"Is that mere guesswork?"

"No, dear," said I quietly.

"I thought no one knew--except one person. I was not even sure
that Leonard Boyce was aware that I knew."

Another bow at a venture. "That one person is Gedge."

"You're right. I suppose he has been talking," she said, greatly
agitated. "He has been putting it about all over the place. I've
been dreading it." Then she sprang to her feet and drew herself up
and snapped her fingers in an heroical way. "And if he has said
that Althea Fenimore drowned herself for love of Leonard Boyce,
what is there in it? After all, what has Leonard Boyce done that
he can't be forgiven? Men are men and women are women. We've tried
for tens of thousands of years to lay down hard and fast lines for
the sexes to walk upon, and we've failed miserably. Suppose
Leonard Boyce did make love to Althea Fenimore--trifle with her
affections, in the old-fashioned phrase. What then? I'm greatly to
blame. It has only lately been brought home to me. Instead of
staying here while we were engaged, I would have my last fling as
an emancipated young woman in London. He consoled himself with
Althea. When she found he meant nothing, she threw herself into
the canal. It was dreadful. It was tragic. He went away and broke
with me. I didn't discover the reason till months afterwards. She
drowned herself for love of him, it's true. But what was his share
in it that he can't be forgiven for? Millions of men have been
forgiven by women for passing loves. Why not he? Why not a
tremendous man like him? A man who has paid every penalty for
wrong, if wrong there was? Blind!"

She walked about and threw up her hands and halted in front of my
chair. "I'll own that until lately I accused him of unforgivable
sin--deceiving me and making love to another girl and driving her
to suicide. I tore him out of my heart and married Willie. We
won't speak of that .... But since he has come back, things seem
different. His mother has told me that one day when he was asleep
she found he was still wearing his identification disc ... there
was an old faded photograph of me on the other side ... it had
been there all through the war .... You see," she added, after a
pause during which her heaving bosom and quivering lip made her
maddeningly lovely, "I don't care a brass button for anything that
Gedge may say."

And that was all my clean-souled Betty knew about it! She had no
idea of deeper faithlessness; no suspicion of Boyce's presence
with Althea on the bank of the canal. She stood pathetic in her
half knowledge. My heart ached.

From her pure woman's point of view she had been justified in her
denunciation of Boyce. He had left her without a word. A wall of
silence came between them. Then she learned the reason. He had
trifled with a young girl's affections and out of despair she had
drowned herself .... But how had she learned? I had to question
her. And it was then that she told me the story of Phyllis and her
father to which I have made previous allusion: how Phyllis, as her
father's secretary, had opened a letter which had frightened her;
how her father's crafty face had frightened her still more; how
she had run to Betty for the easing of her heart. And this letter
was from Leonard Boyce. "I cannot afford one penny more," so the
letter ran, according to Betty's recollection of Phyllis's
recollection, "but if you remain loyal to our agreement, you will
not regret it. If ever I hear of your coupling my name with that
of Miss Fenimore, I'll kill you. I am a man of my word." I think
Betty crystallised Phyllis's looser statement. But the exact
wording was immaterial. Here was Boyce branding himself with
complicity in the tragedy of Althea, and paying Gedge to keep it
dark. Like Sir Anthony, Betty remembered trivial things that
assumed grave significance. There was no room for doubt.
Catastrophe following on his villainy had kept Boyce away from
Wellingsford, had terrified him out of his engagement. And so her
heart had grown bitter against him. You may ask why her knowledge
of the world had not led her to suspect blacker wrong; for a man
does not pay blackmail because he has led a romantic girl into a
wrong notion of the extent of his affection. My only answer is
that Betty was Betty, clean-hearted and clean-souled like the
young Artemis she resembled.

And now she proclaimed that he had expiated his offence. She
proclaimed her renewed and passionate interest in the man. I saw
that deep down in her heart she had always loved him.

After telling me about Phyllis, she returned to the point where
she had broken off. She supposed that Gedge had been talking all
over the place.

"I don't think so, dear," said I. "So far as I know he has only
spoken, first to Randall Holmes--that was what made him break
away from Gedge, whose society he had been cultivating for other
reasons than those I imagined (you remember telling me Phyllis's
sorrowful little tale last year?)." She nodded. "And secondly to
Sir Anthony and myself, a few hours before the Reception."

She clenched her fists and broke out again. "The devil! The
incarnate devil! And Sir Anthony?"

"Pretended to treat Gedge's story as a lie, threw into the fire
without reading it an incriminating letter--possibly the letter
that Phyllis saw, ordered Gedge out of the house and, like a great
gentleman, went through the ceremony."

"Does Leonard know?"

"Not that I'm aware of," said I.

"He must be told. It's terrible to have an enemy waiting to stab
you in the dark--and you blind to boot. Why haven't you told him?"

Why? Why? Why?

It was so hard to keep to the lower key of her conception of
things. I made a little gesture signifying I know not what: that
it was not my business, that I was not on sufficient terms of
intimacy with Boyce, that it didn't seem important enough .... My
helpless shrug suggested, I suppose, all of these excuses. Why
hadn't I warned him? Cowardice, I suppose.

"Either you or I must do it," she went on. "You're his friend. He
thinks more of you than of any other man in the world. And he's
right, dear--" she flashed me a proud glance, sweet and stabbing--
"Don't I know it?"

Then suddenly a new idea seemed to pass through her brain. She
bent forward and touched the light shawl covering my knees.

"For the last month or two you've known what he has done. It
hasn't made any difference in your friendship. You must think with
me that the past is past, that he has purged his sins, or whatever
you like to call them; that he is a man greatly to be forgiven."

"Yes, dear," said I, with a show of bravery, though I dreaded lest
my voice should break, "I think he is a man to be forgiven."

Her logic was remorseless.

With her frank grace she threw herself, in her old attitude, by
the side of my chair.

"I'm so glad we have had this talk, Majy darling. It has made
everything between us so clear and beautiful. It is always such a
grief to me to think you may not understand. I shall always be the
little girl that looked upon you as a wonderful hero and divine
dispenser of chocolates. Only now the chocolates stand for love
and forbearance and sympathy, and all kinds of spiritual goodies."

I passed my hand over her hair. "Silly child!"

"I got it into my head," she continued, "that you were blaming me
for--for my reconciliation with Leonard. But, my dear, my dear,
what woman's heart wouldn't be turned to water at the sight of
him? It makes me so happy that you understand. I can't tell you
how happy."

"Are you going to marry him?" I think my voice was steady and kind
enough.

"Possibly. Some day. If he asks me."

I still stroked her hair. "I wouldn't let it be too soon," said I.

Her eyes were downcast. "On account of Willie?" she murmured.

"No, dear. I don't dare touch on that side of things."

Again a whisper. "Why, then?"

How could I tell her why without betrayal of Boyce? I had to turn
the question playfully. I said, "What should I do without my
Betty?"

"Do you really care about me so much?"

I laughed. There are times when one has to laugh--or overwhelm
oneself in dishonour.

"Now you see my nature in all its vile egotism," said I, and the
statement led to a pretty quarrel.

But after it was over to our joint satisfaction, she had to return
to the distressful main theme of our talk. She harked back to Sir
Anthony, touched on his splendid behaviour, recalled, with a
little dismay, the hitherto unnoted fact that, after the ceremony
he had held himself aloof from those that thronged round Boyce.
Then, without hint from me, she perceived the significance of the
Fenimores' retirement from Wellingsford.

"Leonard's ignorance," she said, "leaves him in. a frightful
position. More than ever he ought to know."

"He ought, indeed, my dear," said I. "And I will tell him. I ought
to have done so before."

I gave my undertaking. I went to bed upbraiding myself for
cowardice and resolved to go to Boyce the next day. Not only Fate,
but honour and decency forced me to the detested task.

Alas! Next morning I was nailed to my bed by my abominable malady.
The attacks had become more frequent of late. Cliffe administered
restoratives and for the first time he lost his smile and looked
worried. You see until quite lately I had had a very tranquil
life, deeply interested in other folks' joys and sorrows, but
moved by very few of my own. And now there had swooped down on me
this ravening pack of emotions which were tearing me to pieces. I
lay for a couple of days tortured by physical pain, humiliation
and mental anguish.

On the evening of the second day, Marigold came into the bedroom
with a puzzled look on his face.

"Colonel Boyce is here, sir. I told him you were in bed and seeing
nobody, but he says he wants to see you on something important. I
asked him whether it couldn't wait till to-morrow, and he said
that if I would give you a password, Vilboek's Farm, you'd be sure
to see him."

"Quite right, Marigold," said I. "Show him in."

Vilboek's Farm! Fate had driven him to me, instead of me to him. I
would see him though it killed me, and get the horrible business
over for ever.

Marigold led him in and drew up a chair for him by the bedside.
After pulling on the lights and drawing the curtains, for the warm
May evening was drawing to a close,

"Anything more, sir, for the present?" he asked.

"Could I have materials for a whisky and soda to hand?" said
Boyce.

"Of course," said I.

Marigold departed. Boyce said:

"If you're too ill to stand me, send me away. But if you can stand
me, for God's sake let me talk to you."

"Talk as much as you like," said I. "This is only one of my stupid
attacks which a man without legs has to put up with."

"But Marigold--"

"Marigold's an old hen," said I.

"Are you sure you're well enough? That's the curse of not being
able to see. Tell me frankly."

"I'm quite sure," said I.

I have never been able to get over the curious embarrassment of
talking to a man whose eyes I cannot see. The black spectacles
seemed to be like a wall behind which the man hid his thoughts. I
watched his lips. Once or twice the odd little twitch had appeared
at the corners.

Even with his baffling black spectacles he looked a gallant figure
of a man. He was precisely dressed in perfectly fitting dinner
jacket and neat black tie; well-groomed from the points of his
patent leather shoes to his trim crisp brown hair. And beneath
this scrupulousness of attire lay the suggestion of great
strength.

Marigold brought in the tray with decanter, siphon and glasses,
and put them on a table, together with cigars and cigarettes, by
his side. After a few deft touches, so as to identify the objects,
Boyce smiled and nodded at Marigold.

"Thanks very much, Sergeant," he said.

If there is one thing Marigold loves, it is to be addressed as
"Sergeant." "Marigold" might--indicate a butler, but "Sergeant"
means a sergeant.

"Perhaps I might fetch the Colonel a more comfortable chair, sir,"
said he.

But Boyce laughed, "No, no!" and Marigold left us.

Boyce's ear listened for the click of the door. Then he turned to
me.

"I was rather mean in sending you in that password. But I felt as
if I should go mad if I didn't see you. You're the only man living
who really knows about me. You're the only human being who can
give me a helping hand. It's strange, old man--the halt leading
the blind. But so it is. And Vilboek's Farm is the damned essence
of the matter. I've come to you to ask you, for the love of God,
to tell me what I am to do."

I guessed what had happened. "Betty Connor has told you something
that I was to tell you."

"Yes," said he. "This afternoon. And in her splendid way she
offered to marry me."

"What did you say?"

"I said that I would give her my answer to-morrow."

"And what will that answer be?"

"It is for you to tell me," said Boyce.

"In order to undertake such a terrible responsibility," said I, "I
must know the whole truth concerning Althea Fenimore."

"I've come here to tell it to you," said he.





CHAPTER XXIII


It was to a priest rather than to a man that he made full
confession of his grievous sin. He did not attempt to mitigate it
or to throw upon another a share of the blame. From that attitude
he did not vary a hair's breadth. Meea culpa; mea maxima culpa.
That was the burthen of his avowal.

I, knowing the strange mingling in his nature of brutality and
sensitiveness, of animal and spiritual, and knowing something of
the unstable character of Althea Fenimore, may more justly, I
think, than he, sketch out the miserable prologue of the drama.
That she was madly, recklessly in love with him there can be no
doubt. Nor can there be doubt that unconsciously she fired the
passion in him. The deliberate, cold-blooded seducer of his
friend's daughter, such as Boyce, in his confession, made himself
out to be, is a rare phenomenon. Almost invariably it is the woman
who tempts--tempts innocently and unknowingly, without intent to
allure, still less with thought of wrong--but tempts all the same
by the attraction which she cannot conceal, by the soft promise
which she cannot keep out of her eyes.

That was the beginning of it. Betty, whom he loved, and to whom he
was engaged, was away from Wellingsford. In those days she was
very much the young Diana, walking in search of chaste adventures,
quite contented with the love that lay serenely warm in her heart
and thinking little of a passionate man's needs--perhaps starting
away from too violent an expression of them--perhaps prohibiting
them altogether. The psychology of the pre-war young girl
absorbed, even though intellectually and for curiosity's sake, in
the feminist movement, is yet to be studied. Betty, then, was
away. Althea, beata possidens, made her artless, innocent appeal
for victory. Unconsciously she tempted. The man yielded. A touch
of the lips in a moment of folly, the man blazed, the woman
helpless was consumed. This happened in January, just before
Althea's supposed visit to Scotland. Boyce was due at a Country
House party near Carlisle. In the first flush of their madness
they agreed upon the wretched plan. She took rooms in the town and
he visited her there. Whether he or she conceived it, I do not
know. If I could judge coldly I should say that it was of feminine
inspiration. A man, particularly one of Boyce's temperament, who
was eager for the possession of a passionately loved woman, would
have carried her off to a little Eden of their own. A calm
consideration of the facts leads to the suggestion of a half-
hearted acquiescence on the part of an entangled man in the
romantic scheme of an inexperienced girl to whom he had suddenly
become all in all.

Such is my plea in extenuation of Boyce's conduct (if plea there
can be), seeing that he raised not a shadow of one of his own. You
may say that my plea is no excuse for his betrayal; that no man,
even if he is tempted, can be pardoned for non-control of his
passions. But I am asking for no pardon; I am trying to obtain
your understanding. Remember what I have told you about Boyce, his
great bull-neck, his blood-sodden life-preserver, the physical
repulsion I felt when he carried me in his arms. In such men the
animal instinct is stronger at times than the trained will.
Whether you give him a measure of your sympathy or not, at any
rate do not believe that his short-lived liaison with Althea was a
matter of deliberate and dastardly seduction. Nor must you think
that I am setting down anything in disparagement of a child whom I
once loved. Long ago I touched lightly on the anomaly of Althea's
character--her mid-Victorian sentimentality and softness, combined
with her modern spirit of independence. A fatal anomaly; a
perilous balance of qualities. Once the soft sentimentality was
warmed into romantic passion, the modern spirit led it recklessly
to a modern conclusion.

The liaison was short-lived. The man was remorseful. He loved
another woman. Very quickly did the poor girl awaken from her
dream.

"I was cruel," said Boyce, fixing me with those awful black
spectacles, "I know it. I ought to have married her. But if I had
married her, I should have been more cruel. I should have hated
her. It would have been an impossible life for both of us. One day
I had to tell her so. Not brutally. In a normal state I think I am
as kind-hearted and gentle as most men. And I couldn't be brutal,
feeling an unutterable cur and craving her forgiveness. But I
wanted Betty and I swore that only one thing should keep me from
her."

"One thing?" I asked.

"The thing that didn't happen," said he.

And so it seemed that Althea accepted the inevitable. The placid,
fatalistic side of her nature asserted itself. Pride, too, helped
her instinctive feminine secretiveness. She lived for months in
her father's house without giving those that were dear to her any
occasion for suspicion. In order to preserve the secrecy Boyce was
bound to continue his visits to Wellings Park. Now and then, when
they met alone, she upbraided him bitterly. On the whole, however,
he concluded that they had agreed to bury an ugly chapter in their
lives.

Yes, it was an ugly chapter. From such you cannot get away, bury
it, as you will, never so deep.

"And all the time remember," he said, "that I was mad for Betty.
The more shy she was, the madder I grew. I could not rest in
Wellingsford without her. When she came here, I came. When she
went to town, I went to town. She was as elusive as a dream.
Finally I pinned her down to a date for our marriage in August. It
was the last time I saw her. She went away to stay with friends.
That was the beginning of June. She was to be away two months. I
knew, if I had clamoured, she would have made it three. It was the
shyness of the exquisite bird in her that fascinated me. I could
never touch Betty in those days without dreading lest I might soil
her feathers. You may laugh at a hulking brute like me saying such
things, but that's the way I saw Betty, that's the way I felt
towards her. I could no more have taken her into my bear's hug and
kissed her roughly than I could have smashed a child down with my
fist. And yet--My God, man! how I ached for her!"

Long as I had loved Betty in a fatherly way, deeply as I loved her
now, the man's unexpected picture of her was a revelation. You see
it was only after her marriage, when she had softened and grown a
woman and come so near me that I felt the great comfort of her
presence when she was by, the need of it when she was away. How
could I have known anything of the elusiveness in her maidenhood
before which he knelt so reverently?

That he so knelt is the keynote of the man's soul untainted by the
flesh.

It made clear to me the tenderness that lay beneath that which was
brutal; the reason of that personal charm which had captivated me
against my will; his defencelessness against the Furies.

So far the narrative has reached the latter part of June. He had
spent the month with his mother. As Betty had ordained that July
should be blank, a month during which the moon should know no
changes but only the crescent of Diana should shine supreme in the
heavens, he had made his mundane arrangements for his fishing
excursion to Norway. On the afternoon of the 23rd he paid a
farewell call at Wellings Park. Althea, in the final settlement of
their relations, had laid it down as a definite condition that he
should maintain his usual social intercourse with the family. A
few young people were playing tennis. Tea was served on the lawn
near by the court. Althea gave no sign of agitation. She played
her game, laughed with her young men, and took casual leave of
Boyce, wishing him good sport. He drew her a pace aside and
murmured: "God bless you for forgiving me."

She laughed a reply out loud: "Oh, that's all right."

When he told me that, I recalled vividly the picture of her, in my
garden, on the last afternoon of her life, eating the strawberries
which she had brought me for tea. I remembered the little slangy
tone in her voice when she had asked me whether I didn't think
life was rather rotten. That was the tone in which she had said to
him, "Oh, that's all right."

During the early afternoon on the 25th, she rang him up on the
telephone. Chance willed that he should receive the call at first
hand. She must see him before he left Wellingsford. She had
something of the utmost importance to tell him. A matter of life
and death. With one awful thought in his mind, he placed his time
at her disposal. For what romantic, desperate or tragic reason she
appointed the night meeting at the end of the chestnut avenue
where the towing-path turns into regions of desolate quietude, he
could not tell. He agreed without argument, dreading the possible
lack of privacy in their talk over the wires.

On that afternoon she came to me, as I have told you, with her
strawberries and her declaration of the rottenness of life.

They met and walked along the towing-path. It was bright
moonlight, but she could not have chosen a lonelier spot, more
free from curious eyes or ears. And then took place a scene which
it is beyond my power to describe. I can only picture it to myself
from Boyce's broken, self-accusing talk. He was going away. She
would never see him again until he returned to marry another
woman. She was making her last frantic bid for happiness. She wept
and sobbed and cajoled and upbraided--You know what women at the
end of their tether can do. He strove to pacify her by the old
arguments which hitherto she had accepted. Suddenly she cried: "If
you don't marry me I am disgraced for ever." And this brought them
to a dead halt.

When he came to this point I remembered the diabolical accuracy of
Gedge's story.

Boyce said: "There is one usual reason why a man should marry a
woman to save her from disgrace. Is that the reason?"

She said "Yes."

The light went out of the man's life.

"In that case," said he, "there can be no question about it. I
will marry you. But why didn't you tell me before?"

She said she did not know. She made the faltering excuses of the
driven girl. They walked on together and sat on the great bar of
the lock gates.

"Till then," said he, "I had never known what it was to have death
in my heart. But I swear to God, Meredyth, I played my part like a
man. I had done a dastardly thing. There was nothing left for me
but to make reparation. In a few moments I tore my life asunder.
The girl I had wronged was to be the mother of my child. I
accepted the situation. I was as kind to her as I could be. She
laid her head on my shoulder and cried, and I put my arm around
her. I felt my heart going out to her in remorse and pity and
tenderness. A man must be a devil who could feel otherwise. ...
Our lives were bound up together. ... I kissed her and she clung
to me. Then we talked for a while--ways and means. ... It was time
to go back. We rose. And then--Meredyth--this is what she said:

"'You swear to marry me?'

"'I swear it,' said I.

"'In spite of anything?'

"I gave my promise. She put her arms round my neck.

"'What I've told you is not wholly true. But the moral disgrace is
there all the time.'

"I took her wrists and disengaged myself and held her and looked
at her.

"'What do you mean--not wholly true?' I asked.

"My God! I shall never forget it." He stuck both his elbows on the
bed and clutched his hair and turned his black glasses wide of me.
"The child crumpled up. She seemed to shrivel like a leaf in the
fire. She said:

"'I've tried to lie to you, but I can't. I can't. Pity me and
forgive me.'

"I started back from her in a sudden fury. I could not forgive
her. Think of the awful revulsion of feeling. Foolishly tricked! I
was mad with anger. I walked away and left her. I must have walked
ten or fifteen yards. Then I heard a splash in the water. I
turned. She was no longer on the bank. I ran up. I heard a cry. I
just saw her sinking. AND I COULDN'T MOVE. As God hears me, it is
true. I knew I must dive in and rescue her--I had run up with
every impulse to do so; BUT I COULD NOT MOVE. I stood shivering
with the paralysis of fear. Fear of the deep black water, the
steep brick sides of the canal that seemed to stretch away for
ever--fear of death, I suppose that was it. I don't know. Fear
irresistible, unconquerable, gripped me as it had gripped me
before, as it has gripped me since. And she drowned before my eyes
while I stood like a stone."

There was an awful pause. He had told me the end of the tragedy so
swiftly and in a voice so keyed to the terror of the scene, that I
lay horror-stricken, unable to speak. He buried his face in his
hands, and between the fleshy part of the palms I saw the muscles
of his lips twitch horribly. I remembered, with a shiver, how I
had first seen them twitch, in his mother's house, when he had
made his strange, almost passionate apology for fear. And he had
all but described this very incident: the reckless, hare-brained
devil standing on the bank of a river and letting a wounded
comrade drown. I remember how he had defined it: "the sudden thing
that hits a man's heart and makes him stand stock-still like a
living corpse--unable to move a muscle--all his will-power out of
gear--just as a motor is out of gear. ... It is as much of a fit
as epilepsy."

The span of stillness was unbearable. The watch on the little
table by my bedside ticked maddeningly. Marigold put his head in
at the door, apparently to warn me that it was getting late. I
waved him imperiously away. Boyce did not notice his entrance.
Presently he raised his head.

"I don't know how long I stood there. But I know that when I moved
she was long since past help. Suddenly there was a sharp crashing
noise on the road below. I looked round and saw no one. But it
gave me a shock--and I ran. I ran like a madman. And I thought as
I ran that, if I were discovered, I should be hanged for murder.
For who would believe my story? Who would believe it now?"

"I believe it, Boyce," I said.

"Yes. You. You know something of the hell my life has been. But
who else? He had every motive for the crime, the lawyers would
say. They could prove it. But, my God! what motive had I for
sending all my gallant fellows to their deaths at Vilboek's Farm?
... The two things are on all fours--and many other things with
them. ... My one sane thought through the horror of it all was to
get home and into the house unobserved. Then I came upon the man
Gedge, who had spied on me."

"I know about that," said I, wishing to spare him from saying more
than was necessary. "He told Fenimore and me about it."

"What was his version?" he asked in a low tone. "I had better hear
it."

When I had told him, he shook his head. "He lied. He was saving
his skin. I was not such a fool, mad as I was, as to leave him
like that. He had seen us together. He had seen me alone. To-
morrow there would be discovery. I offered him a thousand pounds
to say nothing. He haggled. Oh! the ghastly business! Eventually I
suggested that he should come up to London with me by the first
train in the morning and discuss the money. I was dreading lest
someone should come along the avenue and see me. He agreed. I
think I drank a bottle of whisky that night. It kept me alive. We
met in my chambers in London. I had sent my man up the day before
to do some odds and ends for me. I made a clear breast of it to
Gedge. He believed the worst. I don't blame him. I bought his
silence for a thousand a year. I made arrangements for payment
through my bankers. I went to Norway. But I went alone. I didn't
fish. I put off the two men I was to join. I spent over a month
all by myself. I don't think I could tell you a thing about the
place. I walked and walked all day until I was exhausted, and got
sleep that way. I'm sure I was going mad. I should have gone mad
if it hadn't been for the war. I suppose I'm the only Englishman
living or dead who whooped and danced with exultation when he
heard of it. I think my brain must have been a bit touched, for I
laughed and cried and jumped about in a pine-wood with a week old
newspaper in my hands. I came home. You know the rest."

Yes, I knew the rest. The woman he had left to drown had been ever
before his eyes; the avenging Furies in pursuit. This was the
torture in his soul that had led him to many a mad challenge of
Death, who always scorned his defiance. Yes, I knew all that he
could tell me.

But we went on talking. There were a few points I wanted cleared
up. Why should he have kept up a correspondence with Gedge?

"I only wrote one foolish angry letter," he replied.

And I told him how Sir Anthony had thrown it unread into the fire.
Gedge's nocturnal waylaying of him in my front garden was another
unsuccessful attempt to tighten the screw. Like Randall and
myself, he had no fear of Gedge.

Of Sir Anthony he could not speak. He seemed to be crushed by the
heroic achievement. It was the only phase of our interview during
which, by voice and manner and attitude, he appeared to me like a
beaten man. His own bravery at the reception had gone for naught.
He was overwhelmed by the hideous insolence of it.

"I shall never get that man's voice out of my ears as long as I
live," he said hoarsely.

After a while he added: "I wonder whether there is any rest or
purification for me this side of the grave."

I said tentatively, for we had never discussed matters of
religion: "If you believe in Christ, you must believe in the
promise regarding the sins that be as scarlet."

But he turned it aside. "In the olden days, men like me turned
monk and found salvation in fasting and penance. The times in
which we live have changed and we with them, my friend. Nos
mulamur in illis, as the tag goes."

We went on talking--or rather he talked and I listened. Now and
again he would help himself to a drink or a cigarette, and I
marvelled at the clear assurance with which he performed the
various little operations. I, lying in bed, lost all sense of
pain, almost of personality. My little ailments, my little selfish
love of Betty, my little humdrum life itself dwindled
insignificant before the tragic intensity of this strange, curse-
ridden being.

And all the tune we had not spoken of Betty--except the Betty of
long ago. It was I, finally, who gave him the lead.

"And Betty?" said I.

He held out his hand in a gesture that was almost piteous.

"I could tear her from my life. I had no alternative. In the
tearing I hurt her cruelly. To know it was not the least of the
burning hell I lit for myself. But I couldn't tear her from my
heart. When a brute beast like me does love a woman purely and
ideally, it's a desperate business. It means God's Heaven to him,
while it means only an earthly paradise to the ordinary man. It
clutches hold of the one bit of immortal soul he has left, and
nothing in this world can make it let go. That's why I say it's a
desperate business."

"Yes, I can understand," said I.

"I schooled myself to the loss of her. It was part of my
punishment. But now she has come back into my life. Fate has
willed it so. Does it mean that I am forgiven?"

"By whom?" I asked. "By God?"

"By whom else?"

"How dare man," said I, "speak for the Almighty?"

"How is man to know?"

"That's a hard question," said I. "I can only think of answering
it by saying that a man knows of God's forgiveness by the measure
of the Peace of God in his soul."

"There's none of it in mine, my dear chap, and never will be,"
said Boyce.

I strove to help him. For what other purpose had he come to me?

"You think then that the sending of Betty is a sign and a promise?
Yes. Perhaps it is. What then?"

"I must accept it as such," said he. "If there is a God, He would
not give me back the woman I love, only to take her away again.
What shall I do?"

"In what way?" I asked.

"She offered to marry me. I am to give her my answer to-morrow. If
I were the callous, murdering brute that everyone would have the
right to believe I am, I shouldn't have hesitated. If I hadn't
been a tortured, damned soul," he cried, bringing his great fist
down on the bed, "I shouldn't have come here to ask you what my
answer can be. My whole being is infected with horror." He rose
and stood over the bed and, with clenched hands, gesticulated to
the wall in front of him. "I'm incapable of judging. I only know
that I crave her with everything in me. I've got it in my brain
that she's my soul's salvation. Is my brain right? I don't know. I
come to you--a clean, sweet man who knows everything--I don't
think there's a crime on my conscience or a foulness in my nature
which I haven't confessed to you. You can judge straight as I
can't. What answer shall I give to-morrow?"

Did ever man, in a case of conscience, have a greater
responsibility? God forgive me if I solved it wrongly. At any
rate, He knows that I was uninfluenced by mean personal
considerations. All my life I have tried to have an honourable
gentleman and a Christian man. According to my lights I saw only
one clear course.

"Sit down, old man," said I. "You're a bit too big for me like
that." He felt for his chair, sat down and leaned back. "You've
done almost everything," I continued, "that a man can do in
expiation of offences. But there is one thing more that you must
do in order to find peace. You couldn't find peace if you married
Betty and left her in ignorance. You must tell Betty everything--
everything that you have told me. Otherwise you would still be
hag-ridden. If she learned the horror of the thing afterwards,
what would be your position? Acquit your conscience now before God
and a splendid woman, and I stake my faith in each that neither
will fail you."

After a few minutes, during which the man's face was like a mask,
he said:

"That's what I wanted to know. That's what I wanted to be sure of.
Do you mind ringing your bell for Marigold to take me away? I've
kept you up abominably." He rose and held out his hand and I had
to direct him how it could reach mine. When it did, he gripped it
firmly.

"It's impossible," said he, "for you to realise what you've done
for me to-night. You've made my way absolutely clear to me--for
the first time for two years. You're the truest comrade I've ever
had, Meredyth. God bless you."

Marigold appeared, answering my summons, and led Boyce away.
Presently he returned.

"Do you know what time it is, sir?" he asked serenely.

"No," said I.

"It's half-past one."

He busied himself with my arrangements for the night, and
administered what I learned afterwards was a double dose of a
sleeping draught which Cliffe had prescribed for special
occasions. I just remember surprise at feeling so drowsy after the
intense excitement of the evening, and then I fell asleep.

When I awoke in the morning I gathered my wits together and
recalled what had taken place. Marigold entered on tiptoe and
found me already aroused.

"I'm sorry to tell you, sir," said he, "that an accident happened
to Colonel Boyce after he left last night."

"An accident?"

"I suppose so, sir," said Marigold. "That's what his chauffeur
says. He got out of the car in order to sit by the side of the
canal--by the lock gates. He fell in, sir. He's drowned."





CHAPTER XXIV


It is Christmas morning, 1916, the third Christmas of the war. The
tragedy of Boyce's death happened six months ago. Since then I
have been very ill. The shock, too great for my silly heart,
nearly killed me. By all the rules of the game I ought to have
died. But I suppose, like a brother officer long since defunct,
also a Major, one Joe Bagstock, I am devilish tough. Cliffe told
me this morning that, apart from a direct hit by a 42-centimetre
shell, he saw no reason, after what I had gone through, why I
should not live for another hundred years. "I wash my hands of
you," said he. Which indeed is pleasant hearing.

I don't mind dying a bit, if it is my Maker's pleasure; if it
would serve any useful purpose; if it would help my country a
myriadth part of a millimetre on towards victory. But if it would
not matter to the world any more than the demise of a daddy-long-
legs, I prefer to live. In fact, I want to live. I have never
wanted to live more in all my life. I want to see this fight out.
I want to see the Light that is coming after the Darkness. For, by
God! it will come.

And I want to live, too, for personal and private reasons. If I
could regard myself merely as a helpless incumbrance, a useless
jellyfish, absorbing for my maintenance human effort that should
be beneficially exerted elsewhere, I think I should be the first
to bid them take me out and bury me. But it is my wonderful
privilege to look around and see great and beautiful human souls
coming to me for guidance and consolation. Why this should be I do
not rightly know. Perhaps my very infirmity has taught me many
lessons. ...

You see, in the years past, my life was not without its
lonelinesses. It was so natural for the lusty and joyous to
disregard, through mere thoughtlessness, the little weather-beaten
cripple in his wheelchair. But when one of these sacrificed an
hour's glad life in order to sit by the dull chair in a corner,
the cripple did not forget it. He learned in its terrible
intensity the meaning of human kindness. And, in his course
through the years, or as the years coursed by him, he realised
that a pair of gollywog legs was not the worst disability which a
human being might suffer. There were gollywog hearts, brains,
nerves, temperaments, destinies.

Perhaps, in this way, he came to the knowledge that in every human
being lies the spark of immortal beauty, to be fanned into flame
by one little rightly directed breath. At any rate, he learned to
love his kind.

It is Christmas day. I am as happy as a man has a right to be in
these fierce times in England. Love is all around me. I must tell
you little by little. Various things have happened during the last
six months.

At the inquest on the body of Leonard Boyce, the jury gave a
verdict of death by misadventure. The story of the chauffeur, an
old soldier servant devoted to Boyce, received implicit belief. He
had faithfully carried out his master's orders: to conduct him
from the road, across the field, and seat him on the boom of the
lock gates, where he wanted to remain alone in order to enjoy the
quiet of the night and listen to the lap of the water; to return
and fetch him in a quarter of an hour. This he did, dreaming of no
danger. When he came back he realised what had happened. His
master had got up and fallen into the canal. What had really
happened only a few of us knew.

Well, I have told you the man's story. I am not his judge. Whether
his act was the supreme amende, the supreme act of courage or the
supreme act of cowardice, it is not for me to say. I heard nothing
of the matter for many weeks, for they took me off to a nursing
home and kept me in the deathly stillness of a sepulchre. When I
resumed my life in Wellingsford I found smiling faces to welcome
me. My first public action was to give away Phyllis Gedge in
marriage to Randall Holmes--Randall Holmes in the decent kit of
an officer and a gentleman. He made this proposition to me on the
first evening of my return. "The bride's father," said I, somewhat
ironically, "is surely the proper person."

"The bride's father," said he, "is miles away, and, like a wise
and hoary villain, is likely to remain there."

This was news. "Gedge has left Wellingsford?" I cried. "How did
that come about?"

He stuck his hands on his hips and looked down on me pityingly.

"I'm afraid, sir," said he, "you'll never do adequate justice to
my intelligence and my capacity for affairs."

Then he laughed and I guessed what had occurred. My young friend
must have paid a stiff price; but Phyllis and peace were worth it;
and I have said that Randall is a young man of fortune.

"My dear boy," said I, "if you have exorcised this devil of a
father-in-law of yours out of Wellingsford, I'll do any mortal
thing you ask."

I was almost ecstatic. For think what it meant to those whom I
held dear. The man's evil menace was removed from the midst of us.
The man's evil voice was silenced. The tragic secrets of the canal
would be kept. I looked up at my young friend. There was a grim
humour around the corners of his mouth and in his eyes the quiet
masterfulness of those who have looked scornfully at death. I
realised that he had reached a splendid manhood. I realised that
Gedge had realised it too; woe be to him if he played Randall
false. I stuck out my hand.

"Any mortal thing," I repeated.

He regarded me steadily. "Anything? Do you really mean it?"

"You dashed young idiot," I cried, "do you think I'm in the habit
of talking through my hat?"

"Well," said he, "will you look after Phyllis when I'm gone?"

"Gone? Gone where? Eternity?"

"No, no! I've only a fortnight's leave. Then I'm off. Wherever
they send me. Secret Service. You know. It's no use planking
Phyllis in a dug-out of her own"--shades of Oxford and the
Albemarle Review!--"she'd die of loneliness. And she'd die of
culture in the mater's highbrow establishment. Whereas, if you
would take her in--give her a shake-down here--she wouldn't give
much trouble--"

He stammered as even the most audacious young warrior must do when
making so astounding a proposal. But I bade him not be an ass, but
send her along when he had to finish with her; with the result
that for some months my pretty little Phyllis has been an inmate
of my house. Marigold keeps a sort of non-commissioned parent's
eye on her. To him she seems to be still the child whom he fed
solicitously but unemotionally with Mrs. Marigold's cakes at tea
parties years ago. She gives me a daughter's dainty affection.
Thank God for it!

There have been other little changes in Wellingsford. Mrs. Boyce
left the town soon after Leonard's death, and lives with her
sister in London. I had a letter from her this morning--a brave
woman's letter. She has no suspicion of the truth. God still
tempereth the wind. ... Out of the innocent generosity of her
heart she sent me also, as a keepsake, "a little heavy cane, of
which Leonard was extraordinarily fond." She will never know that
I put it into the fire, and with what strange and solemn thoughts
I watched it burn.

It is Christmas Day. Dr. Cliffe, although he has washed his hands
of me, tyrannically keeps me indoors of winter nights, so that I
cannot, as usual, dine at Wellings Park. To counter the fellow's
machinations, however, I have prepared a modest feast to which I
have bidden Sir Anthony and Lady Fenimore and my dearest Betty.

As to Betty--

Phyllis comes in radiant, her pretty face pink above an absurd
panoply of furs. She has had a long letter from Randall from the
Lord knows where. He will be home on leave in the middle of
January. In her excitement she drops prayer-books and hymn-books
all over me. Then, picking them up, reminds me it is time to go to
church. I am an old-fashioned fogey and I go to church on
Christmas Day. I hope our admirable and conscientious Vicar won't
feel it his duty to tell us to love Germans. I simply can't do it.

New Year's Day, 1917.

I must finish off this jumble of a chronicle.

Before us lies the most eventful year in all the old world's
history. Thank God my beloved England is strong, and Great Britain
and our great Empire and immortal France. There is exhilaration in
the air; a consciousness of high ideals; an unwavering resolution
to attain them; a thrilling faith in their ultimate attainment. No
one has died or lost sight or limbs in vain. I look around my own
little circle. Oswald Fenimore, Willie Connor, Reggie Dacre,
Leonard Boyce--how many more could I not add to the list? All
those little burial grounds in France--which France, with her
exquisite sense of beauty, has assigned as British soil for all
time--all those burial grounds, each bearing its modest leaden
inscription--some, indeed, heart-rendingly inscribed "Sacred to
the memory of six unknown British soldiers killed in action"--are
monuments not to be bedewed with tears of lamentation. From the
young lives that have gone there springs imperishable love and
strength and wisdom--and the vast determination to use that love
and strength and wisdom for the great good of mankind. If there is
a God of Battles, guiding, in His inscrutable omniscience, the
hosts that fight for the eternal verities--for all that man in his
straining towards the Godhead has striven for since the world
began--the men who have died will come into their glory, and those
who have mourned will share exultant in the victory. From before
the beginning of Time Mithra has ever been triumphant and his foot
on the throat of Ahriman.

It was in February, 1915, that I began to expand my diary into
this narrative,--nearly two years ago. We have passed through the
darkness. The Dawn is breaking. Sursum corda.

I was going to tell you about Betty when Phyllis, with her furs
and happiness and hymn-books, interrupted me. I should like to
tell you now. But who am I to speak of the mysteries in the soul
of a great woman? But I must try. And I can tell you more now than
I could on Christmas Day.

Last night she insisted on seeing the New Year in with me. If I
had told Marigold that I proposed to sit up after midnight, he
would have come in at ten o'clock, picked me up with finger and
thumb as any Brobdingnagian might have picked up Gulliver, and put
me straightway to bed. But Betty made the announcement in her
airily imperious way, and Marigold, craven before Betty and Mrs.
Marigold, said "Very good, madam," as if Dr. Cliffe and his orders
had never existed. At half past ten she packed off the happy and,
I must confess, the somewhat sleepy Phyllis, and sat down, in her
old attitude by the side of my chair, in front of the fire, and
opened her dear heart to me.

I had guessed what her proud soul had suffered during the last six
months. One who loved her as I did could see it in her face, in
her eyes, in the little hardening of her voice, in odd little
betrayals of feverishness in her manner. But the outside world saw
nothing. The steel in her nature carried her through. She left no
duty unaccomplished. She gave her confidence to no human being. I,
to whom she might have come, was carried off to the sepulchre
above mentioned. Letters were forbidden. But every day, for all
her bleak despair, Betty sent me a box of fresh flowers. They
would not tell me it was Betty who sent them; but I knew. My
wonderful Betty.

When they took off my cerecloths and sent me back to Wellingsford,
Betty was the first to smile her dear welcome. We resumed our old
relations. But Betty, treating me as an invalid, forbore to speak
of Leonard Boyce. Any approach on my part came up against that
iron wall of reserve of which I spoke to you long ago.

But last night she told me all. What she said I cannot repeat. But
she had divined the essential secret of the double tragedy of the
canal. It had become obvious to her that he had made the final
reparation for a wrong far deeper than she had imagined. She was
very clear-eyed and clear-souled. During her long companionship
with pain and sorrow and death, she had learned many things. She
had been purged by the fire of the war of all resentments,
jealousies, harsh judgments, and came forth pure gold. ... Leonard
had been the great love of her life. If you cannot see now why she
married Willie Connor, gave him all that her generous heart could
give, and after his death was irresistibly drawn back to Boyce, I
have written these pages in vain.

A few minutes before midnight Marigold entered with a tray bearing
a cake or two, a pint of champagne and a couple of glasses. While
he was preparing to uncork the bottle Betty slipped from the room
and returned with another glass.

"For Sergeant Marigold," she said.

She opened the French window behind the drawn curtains and
listened. It was a still clear night. Presently the clock of the
Parish Church struck twelve. She came down to the little table by
my side and filled the glasses, and the three of us drank the New
Year in. Then Betty kissed me and we both shook hands with
Marigold, who stood very stiff and determined and cleared his
throat and swallowed something as though he were expected to make
a speech. But Betty anticipated him. She put both her hands on his
gaunt shoulders and looked up into his ugly face.

"You've just wished me a Happy New Year, Sergeant."

"I have," said he, "and I mean it."

"Then will you let me have great happiness in staying here and
helping you to look after the Major?"

He gasped for a moment (as did I) and clutched her arms for an
instant in an iron grip.

"Indeed I will, my dear," said he.

Then he stepped back a pace and stood rigid, his one eye staring,
his weather-beaten face the colour of beetroot. He was blushing.
The beads of perspiration appeared below his awful wig. He
stammered out something about "Ma'am" and "Madam." He had never so
far forgotten himself in his life.

But Betty sprang forward and gripped his hand.

"It is you who are the dear," she said. "You, the greatest and
loyalest friend a man has ever known. And I'll be loyal to you,
never fear."

By what process of enchantment she got an emotion-filled Marigold
to the door and shut it behind him, I shall never discover. On its
slam she laughed--a queer high note. In one swift movement she was
by my knees. And she broke into a passion of tears. For me, I was
the most mystified man under heaven.

Soon she began to speak, her head bowed.

"I've come to the end of the tether, Majy dear. They've driven me
from the hospital--I didn't know how to tell you before--I've been
doing all sorts of idiotic things. The doctors say it's a nervous
breakdown--I've had rather a bad time--but I thought it
contemptible to let one's own wretched little miseries interfere
with one's work for the country--so I fought as hard as I could.
Indeed I did, Majy dear. But it seems I've been playing the fool
without knowing it,--I haven't slept properly for months--and
they've sent me away. Oh, they've been all that's kind, of course
--I must have at least six months' rest, they say--they talk
about nursing homes--I've thought and thought and thought about it
until I'm certain. There's only one rest for me, Majy dear." She
raised a tear-stained, tense and beautiful face and drew herself
up so that one arm leaned on my chair, and the other on my
shoulder. "And that is to be with the one human being that is left
for me to love--oh, really love--you know what I mean--in the
world."

I could only put my hand on her fair young head and say:

"My dear, my dear, you know I love you."

"That is why I'm not afraid to speak. Perfect love casteth out
fear--"

I pushed back her hair. "What is it that you want me to do,
Betty?" I asked. "My life, such as it is, is at your command."

She looked me full, unflinchingly in the eyes.

"If you would give me the privilege of bearing your name, I should
be a proud and happy woman."

We remained there, I don't know how long--she with her hand on my
shoulder, I caressing her dear hair. It was a tremendous
temptation. To have my beloved Betty in all her exquisite warm
loyalty bound to me for the rest of my crippled life. But I found
the courage to say:

"My dear, you are young still, with the wonderful future that no
one alive can foretell before you, and I am old--"

"You're not fifty."

"Still I am old, I belong to the past--to a sort of affray behind
an ant-hill which they called a war. I'm dead, my dear, you are
gloriously alive. I'm of the past, as I say. You're of the future.
You, my dearest, are the embodiment of the woman of the Great War--"
I smiled--"The Woman of the Great War in capital letters. What
your destiny is, God knows. But it isn't to be tied to a
Prehistoric Man like me."

She rose and stood, with her beautiful bare arms behind her,
sweet, magnificent.

"I am a Woman of the Great War. You are quite right. But in a year
or so I shall be like other women of the war who have suffered and
spent their lives, a woman of the past--not of the future. All
sorts of things have been burned up in it." In a quick gesture she
stretched out her hands to me. "Oh, can't you understand?"

I cannot set down the rest of the tender argument. If she had
loved me less, she could have lived in my house, like Phyllis,
without a thought of the conventions. But loving me dearly, she
had got it into her feminine head that the sacredness of the
marriage tie would crown with dignity and beauty the part she had
resolved to play for my happiness.

Well, if I have yielded I pray it may not be set down to me for
selfish exploitation of a woman's exhausted hour. When I said
something of the sort, she laughed and cried:

"Why, I'm bullying you into it!"

The First of January, 1917--the dawn to me, a broken derelict, of
the annus mirabilis. Somehow, foolishly, illogically, I feel that
it will be the annus mirabilis for my beloved country.

And come--after all--I am, in spite of my legs, a Man too of the
Great War. I have lived in it, and worked in it, and suffered in
it--and in it have I won a Great Thing.

So long as one's soul is sound--that is the Great Matter.

Just before we parted last night, I said to Betty:

"The beginning and end of all this business is that you're afraid
of Marigold."

She started back indignantly.

"I'm not! I'm not!"

I laughed. "The Lady protests too much," said I.

The clock struck two. Marigold appeared at the door. He approached
Betty.

"I think, Madam, we ought to let the Major go to bed."

"I think, Marigold," said Betty serenely, "we ought to be ashamed
of ourselves for keeping him up so late."

THE END


End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Red Planet
by William J. Locke

