The Project Gutenberg EBook of Preface to a Dictionary of the English Language
by Samuel Johnson
(#9 in our series by Samuel Johnson)

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers!*****


Title: Preface to a Dictionary of the English Language

Author: Samuel Johnson

Release Date: April, 2004  [EBook #5430]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on July 18, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, PREFACE TO A DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE ***




Steve Harris, Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team



PREFACE TO A DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE

By Samuel Johnson



It is the fate of those who toil at the lower employments of life,
to be rather driven by the fear of evil, than attracted by the
prospect of good; to be exposed to censure, without hope of praise;
to be disgraced by miscarriage, or punished for neglect, where
success would have been without applause, and diligence without
reward.

Among these unhappy mortals is the writer of dictionaries; whom
mankind have considered, not as the pupil, but the slave of science,
the pionier of literature, doomed only to remove rubbish and clear
obstructions from the paths through which Learning and Genius press
forward to conquest and glory, without bestowing a smile on the
humble drudge that facilitates their progress. Every other authour
may aspire to praise; the lexicographer can only hope to escape
reproach, and even this negative recompense has been yet granted
to very few.

I have, notwithstanding this discouragement, attempted a dictionary
of the English language, which, while it was employed in the
cultivation of every species of literature, has itself been hitherto
neglected; suffered to spread, under the direction of chance, into
wild exuberance; resigned to the tyranny of time and fashion; and
exposed to the corruptions of ignorance, and caprices of innovation.

When I took the first survey of my undertaking, I found our speech
copious without order, and energetick without rules: wherever
I turned my view, there was perplexity to be disentangled, and
confusion to be regulated; choice was to be made out of boundless
variety, without any established principle of selection; adulterations
were to be detected, without a settled test of purity; and modes
of expression to be rejected or received, without the suffrages of
any writers of classical reputation or acknowledged authority.

Having therefore no assistance but from general grammar, I applied
myself to the perusal of our writers; and noting whatever might be
of use to ascertain or illustrate any word or phrase, accumulated
in time the materials of a dictionary, which, by degrees, I reduced
to method, establishing to myself, in the progress of the work,
such rules as experience and analogy suggested to me; experience,
which practice and observation were continually increasing; and
analogy, which, though in some words obscure, was evident in others.

In adjusting the ORTHOGRAPHY, which has been to this time unsettled
and fortuitous, I found it necessary to distinguish those irregularities
that are inherent in our tongue, and perhaps coeval with it, from
others which the ignorance or negligence of later writers has
produced. Every language has its anomalies, which, though inconvenient,
and in themselves once unnecessary, must be tolerated among the
imperfections of human things, and which require only to be registered,
that they may not be increased, and ascertained, that they may not
be confounded: but every language has likewise its improprieties and
absurdities, which it is the duty of the lexicographer to correct
or proscribe.

As language was at its beginning merely oral, all words of necessary
or common use were spoken before they were written; and while they
were unfixed by any visible signs, must have been spoken with great
diversity, as we now observe those who cannot read catch sounds
imperfectly, and utter them negligently. When this wild and barbarous
jargon was first reduced to an alphabet, every penman endeavoured
to express, as he could, the sounds which he was accustomed to
pronounce or to receive, and vitiated in writing such words as were
already vitiated in speech. The powers of the letters, when they
were applied to a new language, must have been vague and unsettled,
and therefore different hands would exhibit the same sound by
different combinations.

From this uncertain pronunciation arise in a great part the various
dialects of the same country, which will always be observed to
grow fewer, and less different, as books are multiplied; and from
this arbitrary representation of sounds by letters, proceeds that
diversity of spelling observable in the Saxon remains, and I suppose
in the first books of every nation, which perplexes or destroys
analogy, and produces anomalous formations, that, being once
incorporated, can never be afterward dismissed or reformed.

Of this kind are the derivatives length from long, strength from
strong, darling from dear, breadth from broad, from dry, drought,
and from high, height, which Milton, in zeal for analogy, writes
highth; Quid te exempta juvat spinis de pluribus una [Horace,
Epistles, II. ii. 212]; to change all would be too much, and to
change one is nothing.

This uncertainty is most frequent in the vowels, which are so
capriciously pronounced, and so differently modified, by accident
or affectation, not only in every province, but in every mouth,
that to them, as is well known to etymologists, little regard is
to be shewn in the deduction of one language from another.

Such defects are not errours in orthography, but spots of barbarity
impressed so deep in the English language, that criticism can
never wash them away: these, therefore, must be permitted to remain
untouched; but many words have likewise been altered by accident,
or depraved by ignorance, as the pronunciation of the vulgar has been
weakly followed; and some still continue to be variously written,
as authours differ in their care or skill: of these it was proper
to enquire the true orthography, which I have always considered
as depending on their derivation, and have therefore referred them
to their original languages: thus I write enchant, enchantment,
enchanter, after the French and incantation after the Latin; thus
entire is chosen rather than intire, because it passed to us not
from the Latin integer, but from the French entier.

Of many words it is difficult to say whether they were immediately
received from the Latin or the French, since at the time when we
had dominions in France, we had Latin service in our churches. It
is, however, my opinion, that the French generally supplied us; for
we have few Latin words, among the terms of domestick use, which
are not French; but many French, which are very remote from Latin.

Even in words of which the derivation is apparent, I have been
often obliged to sacrifice uniformity to custom; thus I write, in
compliance with a numberless majority, convey and inveigh, deceit
and receipt, fancy and phantom; sometimes the derivative varies
from the primitive, as explain and explanation, repeat and repetition.

Some combinations of letters having the same power are used
indifferently without any discoverable reason of choice, as in
choak, choke; soap, sope; jewel, fuel, and many others; which I
have sometimes inserted twice, that those who search for them under
either form, may not search in vain.

In examining the orthography of any doubtful word, the mode of
spelling by which it is inserted in the series of the dictionary,
is to be considered as that to which I give, perhaps not often
rashly, the preference. I have left, in the examples, to every
authour his own practice unmolested, that the reader may balance
suffrages, and judge between us: but this question is not always
to be determined by reputed or by real learning; some men, intent
upon greater things, have thought little on sounds and derivations;
some, knowing in the ancient tongues, have neglected those in which
our words are commonly to be sought. Thus Hammond writes fecibleness
for feasibleness, because I suppose he imagined it derived immediately
from the Latin; and some words, such as dependant, dependent,
dependence, dependence, vary their final syllable, as one or another
language is present to the writer.

In this part of the work, where caprice has long wantoned without
controul, and vanity sought praise by petty reformation, I have
endeavoured to proceed with a scholar's reverence for antiquity,
and a grammarian's regard to the genius of our tongue. I have
attempted few alterations, and among those few, perhaps the greater
part is from the modern to the ancient practice; and I hope I may
be allowed to recommend to those, whose thoughts have been perhaps
employed too anxiously on verbal singularities, not to disturb,
upon narrow views, or for minute propriety, the orthography of
their fathers. It has been asserted, that for the law to be KNOWN,
is of more importance than to be RIGHT. Change, says Hooker, is
not made without inconvenience, even from worse to better. There is
in constancy and stability a general and lasting advantage, which
will always overbalance the slow improvements of gradual correction.
Much less ought our written language to comply with the corruptions
of oral utterance, or copy that which every variation of time or
place makes different from itself, and imitate those changes, which
will again be changed, while imitation is employed in observing
them.

This recommendation of steadiness and uniformity does not proceed
from an opinion, that particular combinations of letters have much
influence on human happiness; or that truth may not be successfully
taught by modes of spelling fanciful And erroneous: I am not yet so
lost in lexicography, as to I forget that WORDS ARE THE DAUGHTERS
OF EARTH, AND THAT THINGS ARE THE SONS OF HEAVEN.  Language is only
the instrument of science, and words are but the signs of ideas: I
wish, however, that the instrument might be less apt to decay, and
that signs might be permanent, like the things which they denote.

In settling the orthography, I have not wholly neglected the
pronunciation, which I have directed, by printing an accent upon
the acute or elevated syllable. It will sometimes be found, that
the accent is placed by the authour quoted, on a different syllable
from that marked in the alphabetical series; it is then to be
understood, that custom has varied, or that the authour has, in
my opinion, pronounced wrong. Short directions are sometimes given
where the sound of letters is irregular; and if they are sometimes
omitted, defect in such minute observations will be more easily
excused, than superfluity.

In the investigation both of the orthography and signification of
words, their ETYMOLOGY was necessarily to be considered, and they
were therefore to be divided into primitives and derivatives.
A primitive word, is that which can be traced no further to any
English root; thus circumspect, circumvent, circumstance, delude,
concave and complicate, though compounds in the Latin, are to us
primitives. Derivatives are all those that can be referred to any
word in English of greater simplicity.

The derivatives I have referred to their primitives, with an
accuracy sometimes needless; for who does not see that remoteness
comes from remote, lovely from love, concavity from concave, and
demonstrative from demonstrate? but this grammatical exuberance
the scheme of my work did not allow me to repress. It is of great
importance in examining the general fabrick of a language, to trace
one word from another, by noting the usual modes of derivation and
inflection; and uniformity must be preserved in systematical works,
though sometimes at the expence of particular propriety.

Among other derivatives I have been careful to insert and elucidate
the anomalous plurals of nouns and preterites of verbs, which in
the Teutonick dialects are very frequent, and though familiar to
those who have always used them, interrupt and embarrass the learners
of our language.

The two languages from which our primitives have been derived are
the Roman and Teutonick: under the Roman I comprehend the French
and provincial tongues; and under the Teutonick range the Saxon,
German, and all their kindred dialects. Most of our polysyllables
are Roman, and our words of one syllable are very often Teutonick.

In assigning the Roman original, it has perhaps sometimes happened
that I have mentioned only the Latin, when the word was borrowed
from the French, and considering myself as employed only in the
illustration of my own language, I have not been very careful to
observe whether the Latin word be pure or barbarous, or the French
elegant or obsolete.

For the Teutonick etymologies, I am commonly indebted to Junius
and Skinner, the only names which I have forborn to quote when I
copied their books; not that I might appropriate their labours or
usurp their honours, but that I might spare a perpetual repetition
by one general acknowledgment. Of these, whom I ought not to mention
but with the reverence due to instructors and benefactors, Junius
appears to have excelled in extent of learning, and Skinner in
rectitude of understanding. Junius was accurately skilled in all
the northern languages. Skinner probably examined the ancient and
remoter dialects only by occasional inspection into dictionaries;
but the learning of Junius is often of no other use than to show
him a track by which he may deviate from his purpose, to which
Skinner always presses forward by the shortest way.  Skinner
is often ignorant, but never ridiculous: Junius is always full of
knowledge; but his variety distracts his judgment, and his learning
is very frequently disgraced by his absurdities.

The votaries of the northern muses will not perhaps easily restrain
their indignation, when they find the name of Junius thus degraded
by a disadvantageous comparison; but whatever reverence is due to
his diligence, or his attainments, it can be no criminal degree of
censoriousness to charge that etymologist with want of judgment,
who can seriously derive dream from drama, because life is a drama,
and a drama is a dream? and who declares with a tone of defiance,
that no man can fail to derive moan from [in greek], monos, single
or solitary, who considers that grief naturally loves to be alone.
[Footnote: That I may not appear to have spoken too irreverently of
Junius, I have here subjoined a few Specimens of his etymological
extravagance.

BANISH. religare, ex banno vel territorio exigere, in exilium
agere. G. bannir. It. bandire, bandeggiare. H. bandir. B. bannen.
AEvi medii s criptores bannire dicebant. V. Spelm. in Bannum & in
Banleuga. Quoniam vero regionum urbiumq; limites arduis plerumq;
montibus, altis fluminibus, longis deniq; flexuosisq; angustissimarum
viarum anfractibus includebantur, fieri potest id genus limites ban
did ab eo quod [word in Greek] & [word in Greek] Tarentinis olim,
sicuti tradit Hesychius, vocabantur [words in Greek], "obliquae
ac minime in rectum tendentes viae." Ac fortasse quoque huc facit
quod [word in Greek], eodem Hesychio teste, dicebant [words in
greek] montes arduos.

EMPTY, emtie, vacuus, inanis. A. S. AEmtiz. Nescio an sint ab [word
in Greek] vel [word in Greek]. Vomo, evomo, vomitu evacuo.  Videtur
interim etymologiam hanc non obscure firmare codex Rush.  Mat. xii.
22. ubi antique scriptum invenimus [unknown language].  "Invenit
cam vacantem."

HILL, mons, collis. A. S. hyll. Quod videri potest abscissum
ex [word in Greek] vel [word in Greek]. Collis, tumulus, locus in
plano editior. Hom. II. b. v. 811, [words in Greek]. Ubi authori
brevium scholiorum [ words in Greek].

NAP, to take a nap. Dormire, condormiscere. Cym. heppian. A. S.
hnaeppan. Quod postremum videri potest desumptum ex [word in Greek],
obscuritas, tenebrae: nihil enim aeque solet conciliare somnum,
quam caliginosa profundae noctis obscuritas.

STAMMERER, Balbus, blaesus. Goth. STAMMS. A. S. stamer, stamur. D.
stam. B. stameler. Su. stamma. Isl. stamr. Sunt a [word in Greek]
vel [word in Greek] nimia loquacitate alios offendere; quod impedite
loquentes libentissime garrire soleant; vel quod aliis nimii semper
videantur, etiam parcissime loquentes.]

Our knowledge of the northern literature is so scanty, that of
words undoubtedly Teutonick the original is not always to be found
in any ancient language; and I have therefore inserted Dutch or
German substitutes, which I consider not as radical but parallel,
not as the parents, but sisters of the English.

The words which are represented as thus related by descent
or cognation, do not always agree in sense; for it is incident to
words, as to their authours, to degenerate from their ancestors,
and to change their manners when they change their country. It is
sufficient, in etymological enquiries, if the senses of kindred
words be found such as may easily pass into each other, or such as
may both be referred to one general idea.

The etymology, so far as it is yet known, was easily found in the
volumes where it is particularly and professedly delivered; and,
by proper attention to the rules of derivation, the orthography was
soon adjusted. But to COLLECT the WORDS of our language was a task
of greater difficulty: the deficiency of dictionaries was immediately
apparent; and when they were exhausted, what was yet wanting must
be sought by fortuitous and unguided excursions into books, and
gleaned as industry should find, or chance should offer it, in the
boundless chaos of a living speech. My search, however, has been
either skilful or lucky; for I have much augmented the vocabulary.

As my design was a dictionary, common or appellative, I have omitted
all words which have relation to proper names; such as Arian,
Socinian, Calvinist, Benedictine, Mahometan; but have retained
those of a more general nature, as Heathen, Pagan.

Of the terms of art I have received such as could be found either
in books of science or technical dictionaries; and have often
inserted, from philosophical writers, words which are supported
perhaps only by a single authority, and which being not admitted
into general use, stand yet as candidates or probationers, and must
depend for their adoption on the suffrage of futurity.

The words which our authours have introduced by their knowledge
of foreign languages, or ignorance of their own, by vanity or
wantonness, by compliance with fashion or lust of innovation, I
have registred as they occurred, though commonly only to censure
them, and warn others against the folly of naturalizing useless
foreigners to the injury of the natives.

I have not rejected any by design, merely because they were unnecessary
or exuberant; but have received those which by different writers
have been differently formed, as viscid, and viscidity, viscous,
and viscosity.

Compounded or double words I have seldom noted, except when they
obtain a signification different from that which the components have
in their simple state. Thus highwayman, woodman, and horsecourser,
require an explanation; but of thieflike or coachdriver no notice
was needed, because the primitives contain the meaning of the
compounds.

Words arbitrarily formed by a constant and settled analogy, like
diminutive adjectives in ish, as greenish, bluish, adverbs in ly,
as dully, openly, substantives in ness, as vileness, faultiness,
were less diligently sought, and sometimes have been omitted, when
I had no authority that invited me to insert them; not that they are
not genuine and regular offsprings of English roots, but because
their relation to the primitive being always the same, their
signification cannot be mistaken.

The verbal nouns in ing, such as the keeping of the castle,
the leading of the army, are always neglected, or placed only to
illustrate the sense of the verb, except when they signify things as
well as actions, and have therefore a plural number, as dwelling,
living; or have an absolute and abstract signification, as colouring,
painting, learning.

The participles are likewise omitted, unless, by signifying rather
habit or quality than action, they take the nature of adjectives;
as a thinking man, a man of prudence; a pacing horse, a horse that
can pace: these I have ventured to call participial adjectives.
But neither are these always inserted, because they are commonly
to be understood, without any danger of mistake, by consulting the
verb.

Obsolete words are admitted, when they are found in authours not
obsolete, or when they have any force or beauty that may deserve
revival.

As composition is one of the chief characteristicks of a language,
I have endeavoured to make some reparation for the universal negligence
of my predecessors, by inserting great numbers of compounded words,
as may be found under after, fore, new, night, fair, and many more.
These, numerous as they are, might be multiplied, but that use and
curiosity are here satisfied, and the frame of our language and
modes of our combination amply discovered.

Of some forms of composition, such as that by which re is prefixed
to note repetition, and un to signify contrariety or privation,
all the examples cannot be accumulated, because the use of these
particles, if not wholly arbitrary, is so little limited, that
they are hourly affixed to new words as occasion requires, or is
imagined to require them.

There is another kind of composition more frequent in our language
than perhaps in any other, from which arises to foreigners the
greatest difficulty. We modify the signification of many verbs by
a particle subjoined; as to come off, to escape by a fetch; to fall
on, to attack; to fall off, to apostatize; to break off, to stop
abruptly; to bear out, to justify; to fall in, to comply; to give
over, to cease; to set off, to embellish; to set in, to begin
a continual tenour; to set out, to begin a course or journey; to
take off, to copy; with innumerable expressions of the same kind,
of which some appear wildly irregular, being so far distant from
the sense of the simple words, that no sagacity will be able to
trace the steps by which they arrived at the present use. These
I have noted with great care; and though I cannot flatter myself
that the collection is complete, I believe I have so far assisted
the students of our language, that this kind of phraseology will be
no longer insuperable; and the combinations of verbs and particles,
by chance omitted, will be easily explained by comparison with
those that may be found.

Many words yet stand supported only by the name of Bailey, Ainsworth,
Philips, or the contracted Dict. for Dictionaries subjoined; of
these I am not always certain that they are read in any book but
the works of lexicographers. Of such I have omitted many, because
I had never read them; and many I have inserted, because they may
perhaps exist, though they have escaped my notice: they are, however,
to be yet considered as resting only upon the credit of former
dictionaries. Others, which I considered as useful, or know to be
proper, though I could not at present support them by authorities,
I have suffered to stand upon my own attestation, claiming the same
privilege with my predecessors of being sometimes credited without
proof.

The words, thus selected and disposed, are grammatically considered;
they are referred to the different parts of speech; traced, when
they are irregularly inflected, through their various terminations;
and illustrated by observations, not indeed of great or striking
importance, separately considered, but necessary to the elucidation
of our language, and hitherto neglected or forgotten by English
grammarians.

That part of my work on which I expect malignity most frequently
to fasten, is the explanation; in which I cannot hope to satisfy
those, who are perhaps not inclined to be pleased, since I have
not always been able to satisfy myself. To interpret a language
by itself is very difficult; many words cannot be explained by
synonimes, because the idea signified by them has not more than
one appellation; nor by paraphrase, because simple ideas cannot
be described. When the nature of things is unknown, or the notion
unsettled and indefinite, and various in various minds, the words by
which such notions are conveyed, or such things denoted, will be
ambiguous and perplexed. And such is the fate of hapless lexicography,
that not only darkness, but light, impedes and distresses it;
things may be not only too little, but too much known, to be happily
illustrated. To explain, requires the use of terms less abstruse
than that which is to be explained, and such terms cannot always
be found; for as nothing can be proved but by supposing something
intuitively known, and evident without proof, so nothing can be
defined but by the use of words too plain to admit a definition.

Other words there are, of which the sense is too subtle and evanescent
to be fixed in a paraphrase; such are all those which are by the
grammarians termed expletives, and, in dead languages, are suffered
to pass for empty sounds, of no other use than to fill a verse,
or to modulate a period, but which are easily perceived in living
tongues to have power and emphasis, though it be sometimes such as
no other form of expression can convey.

My labour has likewise been much increased by a class of verbs too
frequent in the English language, of which the signification is
so loose and general, the use so vague and indeterminate, and the
senses detorted so widely from the first idea, that it is hard
to trace them through the maze of variation, to catch them on the
brink of utter inanity, to circumscribe them by any limitations, or
interpret them by any words of distinct and settled meaning; such
are bear, break, come, cast, full, get, give, do, put, set, go,
run, make, take, turn, throw. If of these the whole power is not
accurately delivered, it must be remembered, that while our language
is yet living, and variable by the caprice of every one that speaks
it, these words are hourly shifting their relations, and can no more
be ascertained in a dictionary, than a grove, in the agitation of
a storm, can be accurately delineated from its picture in the water.

The particles are among all nations applied with so great latitude,
that they are not easily reducible under any regular scheme of
explication: this difficulty is not less, nor perhaps greater, in
English, than in other languages. I have laboured them with diligence,
I hope with success; such at least as can be expected in a task,
which no man, however learned or sagacious, has yet been able to
perform.

Some words there are which I cannot explain, because I do not
understand them; these might have been omitted very often with
little inconvenience, but I would not so far indulge my vanity as
to decline this confession: for when Tully owns himself ignorant
whether lessus, in the twelve tables, means a funeral song,
or mourning garment; and Aristotle doubts whether [word in Greek]
in the Iliad, signifies a mule, or muleteer, I may surely, without
shame, leave some obscurities to happier industry, or future
information.

The rigour of interpretative lexicography requires that the
explanation, and the word explained, should always be reciprocal;
this I have always endeavoured, but could not always attain. Words
are seldom exactly synonimous; a new term was not introduced,
but because the former was thought inadequate: names, therefore,
have often many ideas, but few ideas have many names. It was then
necessary to use the proximate word, for the deficiency of single
terms can very seldom be supplied by circumlocution; nor is the
inconvenience great of such mutilated interpretations, because the
sense may easily be collected entire from the examples.

In every word of extensive use, it was requisite to mark the progress
of its meaning, and show by what gradations of intermediate sense
it has passed from its primitive to its remote and accidental
signification; so that every foregoing explanation should tend to
that which follows, and the series be regularly concatenated from
the first notion to the last.

This is specious, but not always practicable; kindred senses may
be so interwoven, that the perplexity cannot be disentangled, nor
any reason be assigned why one should be ranged before the other.
When the radical idea branches out into parallel ramifications,
how can a consecutive series be formed of senses in their nature
collateral? The shades of meaning sometimes pass imperceptibly into
each other; so that though on one side they apparently differ, yet
it is impossible to mark the point of contact. Ideas of the same
race, though not exactly alike, are sometimes so little different,
that no words can express the dissimilitude, though the mind easily
perceives it, when they are exhibited together; and sometimes there
is such a confusion of acceptations, that discernment is wearied,
and distinction puzzled, and perseverance herself hurries to an
end, by crouding together what she cannot separate.

These complaints of difficulty will, by those that have never
considered words beyond their popular use, be thought only the jargon
of a man willing to magnify his labours, and procure veneration to
his studies by involution and obscurity. But every art is obscure
to those that have not learned it: this uncertainty of terms,
and commixture of ideas, is well known to those who have joined
philosophy with grammar; and if I have not expressed them very
clearly, it must be remembered that I am speaking of that which
words are insufficient to explain.

The original sense of words is often driven out of use by their
metaphorical acceptations, yet must be inserted for the sake of
a regular origination. Thus I know not whether ardour is used for
material heat, or whether flagrant, in English, ever signifies the
same with burning; yet such are the primitive ideas of these words,
which are therefore set first, though without examples, that the
figurative senses may be commodiously deduced.

Such is the exuberance of signification which many words have
obtained, that it was scarcely possible to collect all their senses;
sometimes the meaning of derivatives must be sought in the mother
term, and sometimes deficient explanations of the primitive may
be supplied in the train of derivation. In any case of doubt or
difficulty, it will be always proper to examine all the words of
the same race; for some words are slightly passed over to avoid
repetition, some admitted easier and clearer explanation than
others, and all will be better understood, as they are considered
in greater variety of structures and relations.

All the interpretations of words are not written with the same
skill, or the same happiness: things equally easy in themselves,
are not all equally easy to any single mind. Every writer of a
long work commits errours, where there appears neither ambiguity
to mislead, nor obscurity to confound him; and in a search like
this, many felicities of expression will be casually overlooked,
many convenient parallels will be forgotten, and many particulars
will admit improvement from a mind utterly unequal to the whole
performance.

But many seeming faults are to be imputed rather to the nature of
the undertaking, than the negligence of the performer. Thus some
explanations are unavoidably reciprocal or circular, as hind, the
female of the stag; stag, the male of the hind: sometimes easier words
are changed into harder, as burial into sepulture or interment,
drier into desiccative, dryness into siccity or aridity, fit
into paroxysm; for the easiest word, whatever it be, can never
be translated into one more easy. But easiness and difficulty are
merely relative, and if the present prevalence of our language
should invite foreigners to this dictionary, many will be assisted
by those words which now seem only to increase or produce obscurity.
For this reason I have endeavoured frequently to join a Teutonick
and Roman interpretation, as to cheer, to gladden, or exhilarate,
that every learner of English may be assisted by his own tongue.

The solution of all difficulties, and the supply of all defects,
must be sought in the examples, subjoined to the various senses of
each word, and ranged according to the time of their authours.

When first I collected these authorities, I was desirous that every
quotation should be useful to some other end than the illustration
of a word; I therefore extracted from philosophers principles of
science; from historians remarkable facts; from chymists complete
processes; from divines striking exhortations; and from poets beautiful
descriptions. Such is design, while it is yet at a distance from
execution. When the time called upon me to range this accumulation
of elegance and wisdom into an alphabetical series, I soon discovered
that the bulk of my volumes would fright away the student, and was
forced to depart from my scheme of including all that was pleasing or
useful in English literature, and reduce my transcripts very often
to clusters of words, in which scarcely any meaning is retained; thus
to the weariness of copying, I was condemned to add the vexation
of expunging. Some passages I have yet spared, which may relieve
the labour of verbal searches, and intersperse with verdure and
flowers the dusty desarts of barren philology.

The examples, thus mutilated, are no longer to be considered as
conveying the sentiments or doctrine of their authours; the word
for the sake of which they are inserted, with all its appendant
clauses, has been carefully preserved; but it may sometimes happen,
by hasty detruncation, that the general tendency of the sentence
may be changed: the divine may desert his tenets, or the philosopher
his system.

Some of the examples have been taken from writers who were never
mentioned as masters of elegance or models of stile; but words
must be sought where they are used; and in what pages, eminent
for purity, can terms of manufacture or agriculture be found? Many
quotations serve no other purpose, than that of proving the bare
existence of words, and are therefore selected with less scrupulousness
than those which are to teach their structures and relations.

My purpose was to admit no testimony of living authours, that I
might not be misled by partiality, and that none of my cotemporaries
might have reason to complain; nor have I departed from this
resolution, but when some performance of uncommon excellence excited
my veneration, when my memory supplied me, from late books, with
an example that was wanting, or when my heart, in the tenderness
of friendship, solicited admission for a favourite name.

So far have I been from any care to grace my pages with modern
decorations, that I have studiously endeavoured to collect examples
and authorities from the writers before the restoration, whose works
I regard as the wells of English undefiled, as the pure sources of
genuine diction. Our language, for almost a century, has, by the
concurrence of many causes, been gradually departing from its original
Teutonick character, and deviating towards a Gallick structure and
phraseology, from which it ought to be our endeavour to recal it,
by making our ancient volumes the ground-work of stile, admitting
among the additions of later times, only such as may supply real
deficiencies, such as are readily adopted by the genius of our
tongue, and incorporate easily with our native idioms.

But as every language has a time of rudeness antecedent to
perfection, as well as of false refinement and declension, I have
been cautious lest my zeal for antiquity might drive me into times
too remote, and croud my book with words now no longer understood.
I have fixed Sidney's work for the boundary, beyond which I make few
excursions. From the authours which rose in the time of Elizabeth,
a speech might be formed adequate to all the purposes of use and
elegance. If the language of theology were extracted from Hooker
and the translation of the Bible; the terms of natural knowledge
from Bacon; the phrases of policy, war, and navigation from Raleigh;
the dialect of poetry and fiction from Spenser and Sidney; and the
diction of common life from Shakespeare, few ideas would be lost to
mankind, for want of English words, in which they might be expressed.

It is not sufficient that a word is found, unless it be so combined
as that its meaning is apparently determined by the tract and tenour
of the sentence; such passages I have therefore chosen, and when
it happened that any authour gave a definition of a term, or such
an explanation as is equivalent to a definition, I have placed
his authority as a supplement to my own, without regard to the
chronological order, that is otherwise observed.

Some words, indeed, stand unsupported by any authority, but they are
commonly derivative nouns or adverbs, formed from their primitives
by regular and constant analogy, or names of things seldom occurring
in books, or words of which I have reason to doubt the existence.

There is more danger of censure from the multiplicity than paucity
of examples; authorities will sometimes seem to have been accumulated
without necessity or use, and perhaps some will be found, which
might, without loss, have been omitted. But a work of this kind
is not hastily to be charged with superfluities: those quotations,
which to careless or unskilful perusers appear only to repeat
the same sense, will often exhibit, to a more accurate examiner,
diversities of signification, or, at least, afford different shades
of the same meaning: one will shew the word applied to persons,
another to things; one will express an ill, another a good, and a
third a neutral sense; one will prove the expression genuine from
an ancient authour; another will shew it elegant from a modern: a
doubtful authority is corroborated by another of more credit; an
ambiguous sentence is ascertained by a passage clear and determinate;
the word, how often soever repeated, appears with new associates
and in different combinations, and every quotation contributes
something to the stability or enlargement of the language.

When words are used equivocally, I receive them in either sense; when
they are metaphorical, I adopt them in their primitive acceptation.

I have sometimes, though rarely, yielded to the temptation of
exhibiting a genealogy of sentiments, by shewing how one authour
copied the thoughts and diction of another: such quotations are
indeed little more than repetitions, which might justly be censured,
did they not gratify the mind, by affording a kind of intellectual
history.

The various syntactical structures occurring in the examples have
been carefully noted; the licence or negligence with which many
words have been hitherto used, has made our stile capricious and
indeterminate; when the different combinations of the same word are
exhibited together, the preference is readily given to propriety,
and I have often endeavoured to direct the choice.

Thus have I laboured by settling the orthography, displaying the
analogy, regulating the structures, and ascertaining the signification
of English words, to perform all the parts of a faithful lexicographer:
but I have not always executed my own scheme, or satisfied my own
expectations. The work, whatever proofs of diligence and attention
it may exhibit, is yet capable of many improvements: the orthography
which I recommend is still controvertible, the etymology which I
adopt is uncertain, and perhaps frequently erroneous; the explanations
are sometimes too much contracted, and sometimes too much diffused,
the significations are distinguished rather with subtilty than
skill, and the attention is harrassed with unnecessary minuteness.

The examples are too often injudiciously truncated, and perhaps
sometimes, I hope very rarely, alleged in a mistaken sense; for in
making this collection I trusted more to memory, than, in a state
of disquiet and embarrassment, memory can contain, and purposed
to supply at the review what was left incomplete in the first
transcription.

Many terms appropriated to particular occupations, though necessary
and significant, are undoubtedly omitted; and of the words most
studiously considered and exemplified, many senses have escaped
observation.

Yet these failures, however frequent, may admit extenuation and
apology. To have attempted much is always laudable, even when the
enterprize is above the strength that undertakes it: To rest below
his own aim is incident to every one whose fancy is active, and
whose views are comprehensive; nor is any man satisfied with himself
because he has done much, but because he can conceive little. When
first I engaged in this work, I resolved to leave neither words
nor things unexamined, and pleased myself with a prospect of the
hours which I should revel away in feasts of literature, with the
obscure recesses of northern learning, which I should enter and
ransack; the treasures with which I expected every search into those
neglected mines to reward my labour, and the triumph with which I
should display my acquisitions to mankind. When I had thus enquired
into the original of words, I resolved to show likewise my attention
to things; to pierce deep into every science, to enquire the nature
of every substance of which I inserted the name, to limit every idea
by a definition strictly logical, and exhibit every production of
art or nature in an accurate description, that my book might be in
place of all other dictionaries whether appellative or technical.
But these were the dreams of a poet doomed at last to wake
a lexicographer.  I soon found that it is too late to look for
instruments, when the work calls for execution, and that whatever
abilities I had brought to my task, with those I must finally
perform it. To deliberate whenever I doubted, to enquire whenever
I was ignorant, would have protracted the undertaking without end,
and, perhaps, without much improvement; for I did not find by my
first experiments, that that I had not of my own was easily to be
obtained: I saw that one enquiry only gave occasion to another,
that book referred to book, that to search was not always to find,
and to find was not always to be informed; and that thus to persue
perfection, was, like the first inhabitants of Arcadia, to chace
the sun, which, when they had reached the hill where he seemed to
rest, was still beheld at the same distance from them.

I then contracted my design, determining to confide in myself, and
no longer to solicit auxiliaries, which produced more incumbrance
than assistance: by this I obtained at least one advantage, that
I set limits to my work, which would in time be ended, though not
completed.

Despondency has never so far prevailed as to depress me to
negligence; some faults will at last appear to be the effects of
anxious diligence and persevering activity. The nice and subtle
ramifications of meaning were not easily avoided by a mind intent
upon accuracy, and convinced of the necessity of disentangling
combinations, and separating similitudes. Many of the distinctions
which to common readers appear useless and idle, will be found
real and important by men versed in the school philosophy, without
which no dictionary shall ever be accurately compiled, or skilfully
examined. Some senses however there are, which, though not the same,
are yet so nearly allied, that they are often confounded. Most men
think indistinctly, and therefore cannot speak with exactness; and
consequently some examples might be indifferently put to either
signification: this uncertainty is not to be imputed to me, who do
not form, but register the language; who do not teach men how they
should think, but relate how they have hitherto expressed their
thoughts.

The imperfect sense of some examples I lamented, but could not
remedy, and hope they will be compensated by innumerable passages
selected with propriety, and preserved with exactness; some shining
with sparks of imagination, and some replete with treasures of
wisdom.

The orthography and etymology, though imperfect, are not imperfect
for want of care, but because care will not always be successful,
and recollection or information come too late for use.

That many terms of art and manufacture are omitted, must be frankly
acknowledged; but for this defect I may boldly allege that it
was unavoidable: I could not visit caverns to learn the miner's
language, nor take a voyage to perfect my skill in the dialect of
navigation, nor visit the warehouses of merchants, and shops of
artificers, to gain the names of wares, tools and operations, of
which no mention is found in books; what favourable accident, or
easy enquiry brought within my reach, has not been neglected; but
it had been a hopeless labour to glean up words, by courting living
information, and contesting with the sullenness of one, and the
roughness of another.

To furnish the academicians della Crusca with words of this kind,
a series of comedies called la Fiera, or the Fair, was professedly
written by Buonaroti; but I had no such assistant, and therefore
was content to want what they must have wanted likewise, had they
not luckily been so supplied.

Nor are all words which are not found in the vocabulary, to be
lamented as omissions. Of the laborious and mercantile part of the
people, the diction is in a great measure casual and mutable; many
of their terms are formed for some temporary or local convenience,
and though current at certain times and places, are in others
utterly unknown. This fugitive cant, which is always in a state of
increase or decay, cannot be regarded as any part of the durable
materials of a language, and therefore must be suffered to perish
with other things unworthy of preservation.

Care will sometimes betray to the appearance of negligence. He that
is catching opportunities which seldom occur, will suffer those to
pass by unregarded, which he expects hourly to return; he that is
searching for rare and remote things, will neglect those that are
obvious and familiar: thus many of the most common and cursory words
have been inserted with little illustration, because in gathering
the authorities, I forbore to copy those which I thought likely to
occur whenever they were wanted. It is remarkable that, in reviewing
my collection, I found the word sea unexemplified.

Thus it happens, that in things difficult there is danger from
ignorance, and in things easy from confidence; the mind, afraid of
greatness, and disdainful of littleness, hastily withdraws herself
from painful searches, and passes with scornful rapidity over tasks
not adequate to her powers, sometimes too secure for caution, and
again too anxious for vigorous effort; sometimes idle in a plain
path, and sometimes distracted in labyrinths, and dissipated by
different intentions.

A large work is difficult because it is large, even though all
its parts might singly be performed with facility; where there are
many things to be done, each must be allowed its share of time and
labour, in the proportion only which it bears to the whole; nor can
it be expected, that the stones which form the dome of a temple,
should be squared and polished like the diamond of a ring.

Of the event of this work, for which, having laboured it with so
much application, I cannot but have some degree of parental fondness,
it is natural to form conjectures. Those who have been persuaded
to think well of my design, will require that it should fix our
language, and put a stop to those alterations which time and chance
have hitherto been suffered to make in it without opposition.
With this consequence I will confess that I flattered myself for
a while; but now begin to fear that I have indulged expectation
which neither reason nor experience can justify. When we see men
grow old and die at a certain time one after another, from century
to century, we laugh at the elixir that promises to prolong life
to a thousand years; and with equal justice may the lexicographer
be derided, who being able to produce no example of a nation that
has preserved their words and phrases from mutability, shall imagine
that his dictionary can embalm his language, and secure it from
corruption and decay, that it is in his power to change sublunary
nature, and clear the world at once from folly, vanity, and
affectation.

With this hope, however, academies have been instituted, to guard
the avenues of their languages, to retain fugitives, and repulse
intruders; but their vigilance and activity have hitherto been
vain; sounds are too volatile and subtile for legal restraints; to
enchain syllables, and to lash the wind, are equally the undertakings
of pride, unwilling to measure its desires by its strength. The
French language has visibly changed under the inspection of the
academy; the stile of Amelot's translation of Father Paul is observed
by Le Courayer to be un peu passe; and no Italian will maintain
that the diction of any modern writer is not perceptibly different
from that of Boccace, Machiavel, or Caro.

Total and sudden transformations of a language seldom happen; conquests
and migrations are now very rare: but there are other causes of
change, which, though slow in their operation, and invisible in
their progress, are perhaps as much superiour to human resistance,
as the revolutions of the sky, or intumescence of the tide. Commerce,
however necessary, however lucrative, as it depraves the manners,
corrupts the language; they that have frequent intercourse with
strangers, to whom they endeavour to accommodate themselves, must
in time learn a mingled dialect, like the jargon which serves the
traffickers on the Mediterranean and Indian coasts. This will not
always be confined to the exchange, the warehouse, or the port,
but will be communicated by degrees to other ranks of the people,
and be at last incorporated with the current speech.

There are likewise internal causes equally forcible. The language
most likely to continue long without alteration, would be that of
a nation raised a little, and but a little above barbarity, secluded
from strangers, and totally employed in procuring the conveniencies
of life; either without books, or, like some of the Mahometan
countries, with very few: men thus busied and unlearned, having only
such words as common use requires, would perhaps long continue to
express the same notions by the same signs. But no such constancy
can be expected in a people polished by arts, and classed by
subordination, where one part of the community is sustained and
accommodated by the labour of the other. Those who have much leisure
to think, will always be enlarging the stock of ideas, and every
increase of knowledge, whether real or fancied, will produce new
words, or combinations of words. When the mind is unchained from
necessity, it will range after convenience; when it is left at
large in the fields of speculation, it will shift opinions; as any
custom is disused, the words that expressed it must perish with it;
as any opinion grows popular, it will innovate speech in the same
proportion as it alters practice.

As by the cultivation of various sciences, a language is amplified,
it will be more furnished with words deflected from original sense;
the geometrician will talk of a courtier's zenith, or the excentrick
virtue of a wild hero, and the physician of sanguine expectations
and phlegmatick delays. Copiousness of speech will give opportunities
to capricious choice, by which some words will be preferred,
and others degraded; vicissitudes of fashion will enforce the use
of new, or extend the signification of known terms. The tropes of
poetry will make hourly encroachments, and the metaphorical will
become the current sense: pronunciation will be varied by levity
or ignorance, and the pen must at length comply with the tongue;
illiterate writers will at one time or other, by publick infatuation,
rise into renown, who, not knowing the original import of words,
will use them with colloquial licentiousness, confound distinction,
and forget propriety. As politeness increases, some expressions will
be considered as too gross and vulgar for the delicate, others as
too formal and ceremonious for the gay and airy; new phrases are
therefore adopted, which must, for the same reasons, be in time
dismissed. Swift, in his petty treatise on the English language,
allows that new words must sometimes be introduced, but proposes
that none should be suffered to become obsolete. But what makes
a word obsolete, more than general agreement to forbear it? and
how shall it be continued, when it conveys an offensive idea, or
recalled again into the mouths of mankind, when it has once become
unfamiliar by disuse, and unpleasing by unfamiliarity?

There is another cause of alteration more prevalent than any other,
which yet in the present state of the world cannot be obviated. A
mixture of two languages will produce a third distinct from both,
and they will always be mixed, where the chief part of education,
and the most conspicuous accomplishment, is skill in ancient or
in foreign tongues. He that has long cultivated another language,
will find its words and combinations croud upon his memory; and haste
and negligence, refinement and affectation, will obtrude borrowed
terms and exotick expressions.

The great pest of speech is frequency of translation. No book
was ever turned from one language into another, without imparting
something of its native idiom; this is the most mischievous and
comprehensive innovation; single words may enter by thousands, and
the fabrick of the tongue continue the same, but new phraseology
changes much at once; it alters not the single stones of the building,
but the order of the columns. If an academy should be established
for the cultivation of our stile, which I, who can never wish to
see dependance multiplied, hope the spirit of English liberty will
hinder or destroy, let them, instead of compiling grammars and
dictionaries, endeavour, with all their influence, to stop the
licence of translatours, whose idleness and ignorance, if it be
suffered to proceed, will reduce us to babble a dialect of France.

If the changes that we fear be thus irresistible, what remains but
to acquiesce with silence, as in the other insurmountable distresses
of humanity? It remains that we retard what we cannot repel, that
we palliate what we cannot cure. Life may be lengthened by care,
though death cannot be ultimately defeated: tongues, like governments,
have a natural tendency to degeneration; we have long preserved
our constitution, let us make some struggles for our language.

In hope of giving longevity to that which its own nature forbids
to be immortal, I have devoted this book, the labour of years,
to the honour of my country, that we may no longer yield the palm
of philology, without a contest, to the nations of the continent.
The chief glory of every people arises from its authours: whether
I shall add any thing by my own writings to the reputation of
English literature, must be left to time: much of my life has been
lost under the pressures of disease; much has been trifled away;
and much has always been spent in provision for the day that was
passing over me; but I shall not think my employment useless or
ignoble, if by my assistance foreign nations, and distant ages,
gain access to the propagators of knowledge, and understand the
teachers of truth; if my labours afford light to the repositories
of science, and add celebrity to Bacon, to Hooker, to Milton, and
to Boyle.

When I am animated by this wish, I look with pleasure on my book,
however defective, and deliver it to the world with the spirit of
a man that has endeavoured well. That it will immediately become
popular I have not promised to myself: a few wild blunders, and
risible absurdities, from which no work of such multiplicity was
ever free, may for a time furnish folly with laughter, and harden
ignorance in contempt; but useful diligence will at last prevail,
and there never can be wanting some who distinguish desert; who
will consider that no dictionary of a living tongue ever can be
perfect, since while it is hastening to publication, some words are
budding, and some falling away; that a whole life cannot be spent
upon syntax and etymology, and that even a whole life would not be
sufficient; that he, whose design includes whatever language can
express, must often speak of what he does not understand; that
a writer will sometimes be hurried by eagerness to the end, and
sometimes faint with weariness under a task, which Scaliger compares
to the labours of the anvil and the mine; that what is obvious is
not always known, and what is known is not always present; that sudden
fits of inadvertency will surprize vigilance, slight avocations
will seduce attention, and casual eclipses of the mind will darken
learning; and that the writer shall often in vain trace his memory
at the moment of need, for that which yesterday he knew with intuitive
readiness, and which will come uncalled into his thoughts tomorrow.

In this work, when it shall be found that much is omitted, let
it not be forgotten that much likewise is performed; and though
no book was ever spared out of tenderness to the authour, and the
world is little solicitous to know whence proceeded the faults of
that which it condemns; yet it may gratify curiosity to inform it,
that the English Dictionary was written with little assistance of
the learned, and without any patronage of the great; not in the
soft obscurities of retirement, or under the shelter of academick
bowers, but amidst inconvenience and distraction, in sickness and
in sorrow. It may repress the triumph of malignant criticism to
observe, that if our language is not here fully displayed, I have
only failed in an attempt which no human powers have hitherto
completed. If the lexicons of ancient tongues, now immutably fixed,
and comprised in a few volumes, be yet, after the toil of successive
ages, inadequate and delusive; if the aggregated knowledge, and
co-operating diligence of the Italian academicians, did not secure
them from the censure of Beni; if the embodied criticks of France,
when fifty years had been spent upon their work, were obliged to
change its oeconomy, and give their second edition another form,
I may surely be contented without the praise of perfection, which,
if I could obtain, in this gloom of solitude, what would it avail
me? I have protracted my work till most of those whom I wished to
please have sunk into the grave, and success and miscarriage are
empty sounds: I therefore dismiss it with frigid tranquillity,
having little to fear or hope from censure or from praise.

THE END




*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK, PREFACE TO A DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE ***

This file should be named pengl10.txt or pengl10.zip
Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks get a new NUMBER, pengl11.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, pengl10a.txt

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext04 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext04

Or /etext03, 02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

